   #alternate alternate alternate

   Skip to main content

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-WPKQQ38

   worldbank.org
   Home
   (BUTTON) Toggle navigation

Main navigation

     * Home
     * All Blogs
     * Topics
     * Contact
     * COVID-19
     * Search

   Search ______________________________
   (Submit) Submit

Published on Development for Peace

2019 update: How long do refugees stay in exile? To find out, beware of
averages

     * Xavier Devictor

   |December 09, 2019

This page in:

     * English
     * Español
     * Français

     * Email
     * Share
     * Tweet
     * Share
     * Comment

   Image
   Number of refugees by years in exile

   "The average length of time that refugees spend in camps is 17 years."
   This cruel statistic has been quoted many times, influencing our
   perception of refugee crises as never-ending events which are spinning
   out of control. It has significant implications when deciding the type
   of aid that is needed, the combination of humanitarian and development
   support, and the possible responses to the crisis.

   But is it true? Not so.

   In fact, the "17 year" statistic comes from a 2004 internal UNHCR
   report, and it was accompanied by many caveats which have been lost
   along the way. The statistic does not refer to camps since the
   overwhelming majority of refugees live outside camps. It is limited to
   situations of five years or more, so it is an average duration of the
   longest situations, not of all situations. Most importantly, it refers
   to the duration of situations, not to the time people have stayed in
   exile.

   Take the situation of Somali refugees in Kenya. Refugees started to
   arrive massively around 1993, about 26 years ago. Their number now
   stands at 252,500. But can we say that all 252,500 have been in exile
   for 26 years?

   In fact, forced displacement situations are inherently dynamic: numbers
   vary every year, reflecting political and military developments in the
   country of origin  (figure 1). In fact, a large part of the current
   refugees did not arrive before 2008, i.e. about 10 years ago.
   Figure 1 Number of Somali refugees in Kenya (UNHCR data)
   Figure 1. Number of Somali refugees in Kenya (UNHCR data)

   Along these lines, and using data published by UNHCR as of end-2018, we
   re-calculated the earliest date at which various cohorts of refugees
   would have arrived in each situation (see our methodology as we
   developed it for this earlier working paper). We then aggregated all
   situations into a single "global refugee population" and calculated
   global averages and median durations.

   So what are the results?
   Figure 2 Global number of refugees by year of exile
   Figure 2. Global number of refugees by year of exile

   When we look at the "global refugee population" (see Figure 2), we can
   now distinguish several distinct episodes of displacement:

   Now let’s group these figures by largest waves of arrivals (Figure 3):
   Number of refugees by years in exile –Grouped by country
   Figure 3. Number of refugees by years in exile –Grouped by country

   There is a large cohort of about 8.5 million "recent refugees," who
   arrived over the last four years. This includes about 2.9 million
   Syrians, as well as people fleeing from South Sudan (1.7 million),
   Myanmar (0.7 million), Afghanistan (0.4 million), Burundi (0.3
   million), the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) (0.3 million), Iraq
   (.2 million), and the Central African Republic (0.2 million).

   Another large cohort, of about 6.4 million, has spent between 5 and 9
   years in exile. It includes refugees from Syria (3.6 million), South
   Sudan (0.6 million), the bulk of the current Somali refugees (0.3
   million), and people fleeing from Sudan (0.3 million), the Central
   African Republic (0.2 million), Afghanistan (0.2 million), and the
   Democratic Republic of Congo (0.2 million).

   About 3.2 million people have been in exile between 10 and 34 years.
   This includes years during which numbers are relatively low, and two
   episodes where they are higher, around 17 years ago, with the arrival
   of about 0.3 million Sudanese refugees, and around 27 years ago, with
   the arrival of about 0.5 million Somalis and 0.2 million Eritreans.

   Lastly, a large group of refugees has been in exile for 35 to 40 years:
   these 2.2 million refugees include mainly Afghans (1.9 million), but
   also about 0.3 million Vietnamese who fled their country during the
   late 1970s and early 1980s. Finally, there are few very protracted
   situations, up to 58 years, including mainly Western Sahara.

   We can now turn to average durations. As of end-2018, the median
   duration of exile stands at 5 years, i.e. half of the refugees
   worldwide have spent 5 years or less in exile. The median has
   fluctuated widely since the end of the Cold War, in 1991, between 4 and
   14 years. By contrast, the mean duration stands at 10.3 years, and has
   been relatively stable since the late 1990s, between 10 and 15 years.

   But this leads to another important finding: trends can be
   counter-intuitive. In fact, a decline in the average duration of exile
   is typically not an improvement, but rather the consequence of a
   degradation of the global situation . The averages increase in years
   when there are relatively few new refugees, and they drop when large
   numbers of people flow in, for example in 1993-1994 (with conflicts in
   Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda), in 1997-1999 (with conflicts in DRC and
   other parts of Africa), after 2003 (with conflict in Iraq, Somalia, and
   Sudan), and since 2013 (with the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic).

   We also looked at the number of people who have spent more than five
   years in exile. As of end-2018, this number stands at 11.9 million. The
   number of protracted refugees had been remarkably stable since 1991 at
   5 to 7 million throughout most of the period, before dramatically
   jumping in the last 3 years.   For this group, the average duration of
   exile increases over time – largely because of the unresolved situation
   of Afghan refugees which pushes averages up. It is now well over 20
   years.

   This short analysis of UNHCR data shows that available refugee data can
   be used to clarify some important parts of the policy debate. It is
   important to ensure that this debate is informed by evidence , which
   can help provide a more nuanced perspective of a complex issue.
   Topics
   Fragility Conflict and Violence
   Series
   Pathways for Peace
   Sustainable Communities

Authors

   Xavier Devictor

Xavier Devictor

   Co-Director, World Development Report 2023
   More Blogs By Xavier

   6

   Euan Ritchie
   December 13, 2019

   "Finally, there are few very protracted situations, up to 58 years,
   including mainly Western Sahara"

   This sounds wrong to me, as the Western Sahara conflict only started in
   1975. I checked the UNHCR data and indeed Western Sahara refugees only
   enter the data 1975, but most in the 80s.

   It would be great for transparency if the World bank would publish the
   code for this sort of analysis.
   Claudia Gabarain
   December 13, 2019

   (Blog admin) Dear Euan, thanks for your interest. The methodology used
   is described in the working paper that Xavier mentions in the paragraph
   right after the first graphic, and it was developed three years ago,
   when he first performed a similar analysis:
   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/549261472764700982/How-many-y
   … Please let us know here if this doesn't answer your question. Cheers.
   Euan Ritchie
   January 30, 2020

   Many thanks for responding. However this doesn't answer my question.
   The dataset that is referenced in the paper (UNHCR time series) does
   not contain any Western Saharan refugees that have been displaced since
   before 1975, and so it doesn't matter what the methodology is, the
   maximum possible average is 44 years.

   In fact using the methodology outlined in the paper to calculate
   average displacement time for Western Saharans in Mauritania and
   Algeria (which accounts for >99%) I get an average of 34 years. (Happy
   to share my calculations)

   I don't have a particular concern with WS. But the implication in the
   paragraph I referred to is that Western Saharans have been displaced
   for longer than they possibly could have been, and this makes me
   question the accuracy of numbers. Which is why I think it would be
   useful to see the code.
   January 31, 2020

   Dear Euan, first off apologies for the delay in publishing your second
   comment. You are right: We contacted the authors and they are grateful
   for your noticing the mix-up. The situation that lasted for 58 years
   actually corresponds to Rwanda and not Western Sahara (which indeed
   started in 1975). Codes are available upon request to the authors
   ([email protected]; [email protected])
   Thanks so much for your interest and for contacting us.

   - Claudia (blog admin)
   Lister Matome Kobe
   May 28, 2021

   It is well said, surely need an update
   Jack Woodruff
   May 28, 2021

   Good data, but still searching for what is perhaps the most relevant
   statistic here:

   "Of refugees who have been successfully resettled, what was THEIR wait
   time distribution?

   This statistic would isolate away the problem of new refugees dragging
   down the average length of time as a refugee.

   x

   This site uses cookies to optimize functionality and give you the best
   possible experience. If you continue to navigate this website beyond
   this page, cookies will be placed on your browser. To learn more about
   cookies, click here.

     * Legal Privacy Notice Access to Information Jobs Contact

   REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION
     * The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty
     * IBRD IDA IFC MIGA ICSID

   © The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved.
