   #Professional Aspirations in Exile Recherches sociologiques et
   anthropologiques, Numéros Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques,
   Documents

   Navigation – Plan du site

Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques Recherches sociologiques et
anthropologiques

   AccueilNuméros50-2DossierProfessional Aspirations in Exile

   Recherche___________ (BUTTON) Chercher
   Sommaire - Document précédent - Document suivant
   50-2 | 2019
   Vieillir dans l’art. Revisiter les trajectoires des artistes “modestes”
   Dossier

Professional Aspirations in Exile

   The Modest Careers of Migrant Japanese Musicians in Europe
   Beata M. Kowalczyk
   p. 101-122
   https://doi.org/10.4000/rsa.3494
   Résumé | Index | Plan | Texte | Bibliographie | Annexe | Notes |
   Citation | Auteur

Résumé

   This paper utilizes qualitative and quantitative analysis to examine
   the careers of foreign (non-EU) musicians living and working in Europe,
   and in particular, the second phase of a career in classical music of
   Japanese musicians in France and Poland. It focuses on the endeavors of
   both male and female musicians to remain in the profession, in the face
   of a number of interrelated sources of inequality (i.e., socio-cultural
   origins, ethnicity, gender and class) (Winker/Degele, 2011) that have a
   structuring impact on their professional and life decisions. This
   analysis foregrounds ethnicity (nationality), socio-cultural origins,
   and socially contextualized gender as the most significant elements in
   the second stage of the career-making process. In other words, this
   article takes an intersectional stance (Crenshaw, 1995) to examine the
   process of performing a “modest” career in music for male and female
   Japanese migrant artists as a process of “working out a compromise”
   between what is desired (a passion for music and aesthetic
   satisfaction), what is professionally achievable (in France and
   Poland), and what is expected upon an eventual return to Japan.
   Haut de page

Entrées d’index

Index by keyword:

   Japanese classical musicians, highly skilled migration, artistic
   career, intersectionality
   Haut de page

Plan

   I. Introduction
   II. Methodological framework
   III. Leaving Japan to settle in Europe
   A. Musicianship in the context of a patriarchal society
   B. Locked into a career trajectory
   1. Male musicians – redefining professional status after hours
   2. Female musicians – limited living stability instead of occupational
   ambitions
   a. Social emancipation of full-time working mothers
   b. Freelancing mothers in France and Poland
   c. Single freelancing Japanese women – working for a visa
   C. Swerving careers
   IV. Conclusion
   Haut de page

Texte intégral

   PDF 307k Signaler ce document

I. Introduction

   1This article elaborates on the second stage of Japanese musicians’
   occupational careers in Europe, namely in France and in Poland. Its
   purpose is to demonstrate how male and female Japanese musicians
   inhabit a disparate socio-cultural context – both in France and Poland
   – as they continue their music career into its second phase, adapting
   to a failure to translate their music skills into a soloist career,
   which is considered the model path in the social world of classical
   music (Westby, 1960 ; Faulkner, 1973 ; Wagner, 2015). An intersectional
   analysis of this process (Crenshaw, 1995 ; Winker/Degele, 2011) will
   bring to the fore various interacting categories (i.e., age, gender,
   socio-cultural origins, ethnicity and class) that reflect the dynamics
   and main tensions in musicians’ careers – at least to an extent, since
   the Japanese remain active subjects in this process – and ultimately
   prompt musicians to accept a modest professional situation once they
   have elaborated a rationalization for this and adopted strategies for
   attaining alternative sources of satisfaction (in their professional
   and private lives) that support their occupational decisions.

   2To the best of my knowledge, no studies have systematically traced the
   professional biographies of Japanese musicians in Europe from a
   sociological stance. Scholars who have dealt with the topic of
   classical music in an Asian (i.e., Japanese) context have either
   explored the relations between Japanese or Asian and Western music
   traditions (Watanabe, 1982 ; Yang, 2007 ; Yoshihara, 2007) or presented
   individual careers viewed from an autobiographical or biographical
   perspective (cf. Ishikawa, 2001 ; Ando, 2010). Hence, this study is a
   pioneering sociological investigation of the European career
   trajectories of Japanese musicians, grounded in qualitative data.

   3Extant research on musicians’ careers in general brings into focus age
   (as a determinant of career advancement), the social practices related
   to the practice of this profession (i.e., the specificity of
   interactions, division of labor, construction of reputation) and gender
   (male and female roles in the context of reproduction and production)
   as the elements that largely shape a career in musicianship and help
   determine how it is pursued in the second stage.

   4Age brackets are associated with the “socially expected duration”
   (Merton, 1984) of phases in an ideal career model, which in the social
   world of classical music is designated by the soloist’s path (Westby,
   1960 ; Wagner, 2015). The upper age limits for prospective musicians
   have been recently lowering due to the appearance of very young Asian
   musicians on the world stage, whose high level of technical skills have
   led to increasingly fierce competition among musicians (Wagner, 2015).
   But it has generally been accepted for decades that once one reaches
   the age of 25, she enters the phase of her career trajectory when she
   can no longer expect a “turning point” (Hughes, 1971) in terms of
   achieving the status of a world-renowned music star. Orchestra
   musicians can continue to expect upward mobility for just ten years
   longer, until the age of 35 (Westby, 1960 ; Faulkner, 1973 ; Lehmann,
   2002 ; Coulangeon, 2004). The second phase of a music career begins
   around these age boundaries, and proceeds along a rather predictable
   course in terms of occupational mobility.

   5Social practices related to the execution of professional musicianship
   affect the im-/possibility of remaining in the profession. Namely, the
   specificity of a musician’s job constantly exposes instrumentalists to
   the risks of progressive deskilling (Kofman, 2012, 2016), downward
   movement and deprofessionalization if they fail to keep up with the
   minimum technical requirements of commercial projects (Faulkner, 1973,
   1983 ; Faulkner/Anderson, 1987 ; Wagner, 2015). Musicians are only as
   good as their last performance, as one once told Robert Faulkner
   (1983). This means that a music career is conditioned on instant
   performance (the quality of playing) and that a musician’s reputation
   is subject to ceaseless renegotiation. This concerns all types of
   careers, although freelancers are more vulnerable to professional
   precariousness (Coulangeon, 2004) than orchestra musicians or music
   teachers. This profession is carried out under high pressure and high
   demands in terms of performance quality, particularly for those
   pursuing freelance careers. Musicians cannot refuse a job, while each
   acceptance of a performance is decisive for the future course of their
   career. A failure to meet quality expectation can prevent future calls
   from potential employers (Faulkner, 1973, 1983 ; Faulkner/Anderson,
   1987).

   6Lastly, musicians’ careers are impacted by gender through a social
   order that in the majority of societies (depending, for example, on the
   development of an infrastructure to support working mothers) continues
   to allocate reproduction tasks to women and production duties to men
   (Ravet/Coulangeon, 2003), thus navigating their professional
   aspirations into the private and public spheres, respectively. At the
   second stage of their music career trajectory, married men and women
   may both concentrate on the practical side of their work, carried out
   to support their households in less prestigious orchestra ranks
   (Lehmann, 2002 ; Ravet/Coulangeon, 2003 ; Ravet, 2007) ; however, men
   more often seek to fulfill their aesthetic expectations outside of work
   by taking up more artistically rewarding activities, whereas women tend
   to subordinate their professional pursuits to family life.

   7The examination of 95 careers of Japanese musicians, out of which 50
   careers were studied in detail based on in-depth qualitative
   interviews, revealed that their professional pursuits in the second
   phase develop amidst such tensions, to which must be added their
   migrant status (Sayad, 1999), which affects them in a variety of ways
   (i.e. the need to obtain residence and work permits, access to jobs on
   the music market, the right to be granted social benefits, and the
   socio-cultural particularities of the sending and receiving countries)
   and frames their situation as both an emigrant and immigrant. This
   paper investigates how aging migrant-musicians coordinate their career
   in its second phase and how or to what extent their status as a migrant
   affects this career or musicians’ decision to remain in or withdraw
   from the profession.

   8The three following issues drive the analysis presented in this
   article : (1) why do Japanese musicians leave their country to
   establish themselves in Europe ; (2) how do male and female musicians
   develop their professional careers in Europe (France and Poland), and
   whether this is dependent on their being able to obtain a stable
   position in an orchestra or in academia, or are freelancing on
   short-term projects ; and (3) why do these musicians persist in their
   modest careers in spite of the occupational precariousness experienced,
   a frequently low level of job satisfaction, and moderate professional
   recognition. In other words, in focusing on the second stage of the
   professional careers of Japanese musicians, this paper aims at an
   understanding of how the migration project affects male and female
   Japanese careers objectively (work environment) by changing their
   professional situation, and subjectively (professional satisfaction,
   identification) by impacting their perception of their occupational
   track in Europe in the context of the gender order they had
   internalized earlier in Japan.

II. Methodological framework

   9The demonstration developed in this article is based on material
   retrieved with the use of three kinds of qualitative tools :
   semi-structured in-depth interviews, irregular observation, and both
   quantitative and qualitative analysis of extant data : statistics from
   websites and archives (private and institutional). The main evidence
   for tracing the experience of the first stage of musicians’ careers
   from a retrospective standpoint comes from qualitative, semi-structured
   individual interviews conducted with Japanese musicians in their mother
   tongue. 50 semi-structured interviews were carried out with male and
   female Japanese classical musicians of various specializations in their
   mother tongue. These individuals were recruited for the study on
   condition of having experience with being educated and leading a
   professional and private life in Europe (i.e., 25 interviewees were
   based in France and 25 in Poland). The vast majority of respondents
   consisted of professionally active, long-term sojourners age 30-45,
   most of whom were female pianists, especially in the Polish group.

   10I also examined 45 careers of Japanese musicians as presented in
   music competition catalogues, in the press in the form of interviews or
   articles, and on websites. To verify my findings, I discussed the
   material with 20 professionals, whom I call “experts” from the music
   milieu (i.e., music professors, sound directors, orchestra musicians
   etc.), who had previously cooperated with Japanese musicians.

   11This data has been supplemented by various informal observations
   (i.e., recitals, music lessons) ; an analysis of data from private and
   institutional archives (Fryderyk Chopin University of Music
   [hereinafter referred to as FCUM], Conservatoire national supérieur de
   musique et de danse de Paris [hereinafter referred to as CNSMDP]) ;
   official documents (i.e., statistics from music competitions,
   orchestras in France and Poland) ; and musicians’ private blogs and
   websites. I also collected statistics from music conservatories, music
   competitions, and French and Polish orchestras, and consulted both
   archives and websites to ground the results in a broader context. I
   compared two substantially disparate environments – French (with long
   migration traditions) and Polish (still relatively closed for migrants)
   – with the aim of distilling the impact that various structural and
   socio-cultural environmental idiosyncrasies have on career dynamics.

III. Leaving Japan to settle in Europe

   12The Japanese musicians travelled to Europe for educational purposes,
   at least this is how they explained their decision to move to Europe.
   Some headed abroad shortly after high school to enroll in full-time
   studies, while others waited until they graduated from university in
   Japan, with the aim of participating in a postgraduate music
   apprenticeship in Poland/France. Deeper analysis of testimonies in the
   interviews about life in Japan leads one to conclude that education was
   most likely merely a pretext concealing other reasons that prompted
   this mobility. Among the many socio-cultural aspects of life in Japan
   that fueled musicians’ migration, two elements appeared repeatedly in
   the majority of statements : (1) a gender-based division of social
   roles that today still erects barriers for women who would like to join
   the production sphere in a full-time mode, traditionally reserved for
   men, and which channels them into reproductive tasks ; (2) the working
   conditions of professional musicians in Japan. I shall briefly
   elaborate on each aspect, since both of them impact career making in
   the second phase.

A. Musicianship in the context of a patriarchal society

     * 1 ______________________________ It is interesting to note here the
       proliferation of knowledge about (...)

   13In corroboration with extant studies on the subject (Watanabe, 1982 ;
   Yoshihara, 2007 ; Yang, 2007) the research demonstrates that the
   Japanese ascribe to classical music a symbolic value as a universal
   apparatus of social distinction1. The awareness among Japanese parents
   of the practice of exposing children to music at a very young age (two
   or three years old, depending on the instrument) should be ascribed to
   the fact that the mastery of musical technique has been adopted as a
   tool of social advancement, modeled on Western mechanisms of social
   distinction. In this sense, classical music has replaced the
   traditional mechanisms which used to serve this purpose in Japan, i.e.,
   proficiency in Japanese poetic forms or Japanese instruments such as
   the koto. Private music classes offered by piano manufacturers such as
   Yamaha and Kawaii – a uniquely Japanese system of music education –
   have partly satisfied this social demand for music education (as a tool
   for social advancement).

   14In terms of a bourgeois education, notwithstanding a general social
   recognition of skills in instrument use, a paradox in the vocational
   situation of classical musicians in Japan is that transforming these
   skills into a profession is unacceptable for men. This paradox is
   closely related to the patriarchal “gender order” (Ehara, 2001) which
   still pervades in Japanese society. According to the traditional gender
   role division, a man should hold a fixed position as the one
   responsible for economically supporting the household. Both male and
   female respondents frequently emphasized that musicianship was not
   considered a masculine job, due to limited perspectives for stable and
   profitable working conditions (orchestra member or teaching post). The
   uncertainty of employment (e.g., underinvestment in the music sector,
   caused both by low public interest plus a low fertility rate, which
   affects the number of students in academia in general, and aggravates
   the problem of an oversupply of teachers) and limited prospects offered
   by the private sector (i.e., promotion, pay increases) also deem
   musicianship a “non-masculine” profession. Men can therefore be
   encouraged by their parents or schoolteachers to take up an instrument
   as long as they do not consider it a real vocational option for the
   future.

   15Contrary to this, families raise no objections against their daughter
   engaging in formal music education, estimating that music literacy,
   above all, will strengthen their position on the marital market, but
   also that musical competences can provide a future mother and wife with
   potential occupationnal activity (frequently piano teaching, which
   explains the popularity of the instrument in Japan) during free time
   following her primary duties. In other words, female musicians in Japan
   are supposed to carry out musicianship as a part-time activity, which
   matches social expectations towards women, whose first responsibilities
   in a traditional family are reproduction and care giving.

   16We will now examine the plight of the professional musician in Japan.

   17The data collected in this study lead to the conclusion that Japanese
   society’s recognition of musical literacy as a symbol of social status
   represents an imitation of conventions rooted in European social
   orders, rather than in Japanese social practices, and that classical
   musicians are not included in its hierarchy of prestigious professions.
   Note that such prestige is measured by the high income and elevated
   social position of the individual, which in patriarchal Japanese
   society are both reserved for men. Underinvestment in the Japanese
   music market (Taniguchi, 2000) and the scarcity of stable academic or
   orchestra positions render this market vulnerable to precarious working
   conditions.
     * 2 ______________________________ There were approximately 5-11
       orchestras in Tokyo in 1982, depending (...)

   18The music sector in Japan is dominated by freelance jobs such as
   e.g., private teaching, entertainment gigs such as playing in hotel
   lobbies and in restaurants in the evening, and performing at weddings
   or during cruises. According to research data, performers accept these
   jobs purely for financial reasons, while simultaneously being aware of
   the deterioration in skills that such jobs may entail. Music university
   graduates in Japan have slimmer chances in the competitive pursuit of
   positions (1) in orchestras2 and (2) tenured teaching in a high
   school/conservatoire, with the latter considered to be even more stable
   and profitable (Taniguchi, 2000 :17). Since orchestra and academic
   teaching are considered the most relatively steady social posts that
   musicians can occupy in Japan, they are chiefly reserved for men.

   19Aside from this, there exists a specific niche created out of the
   combination of a shortage of demand (positions) and oversupply of
   formally trained musicians in Japan. Namely, this is the market of
   privately held recitals, as described by respondents, where musicians
   engage their own money to perform music. These musicians face the
   problem of reconciling their hopes regarding the core activities of
   their chosen profession (playing an instrument), with harsh a reality
   (having to pay for concerts, instead of being paid for them). To play a
   concert, some musicians must handle all the “dirty work” (Hughes, 1962)
   that is usually allocated to agency staff, as one female musician
   described it :

     Hardly anybody can afford to pay for an event that costs one million
     yen. So let’s say there are three pianists who will share the
     financial burden. They have to pay for the renting fee, posters, the
     studio where they practice as well as the agent, who organizes the
     concert and also any accompanying musicians, who come from abroad :
     the plane ticket, hotel, trains and all the rest. And you have to
     sell tickets to your friends and neighbors. If the concert sells
     well, the musician may get back part of the money invested. But this
     is rarely the case. Another thing is the quality of such concerts.
     Since renting a studio for practicing is very expensive in Japan,
     they are usually able to make just one run. Surely this is
     insufficient, so during the concert, accompanying musicians adjust
     to the pianist most of the time. Frequently, these concerts are
     artistically poor. The musicians simply do not have enough time to
     work on the program together (Woman, piano, forties, Japan –
     formerly Poland).

   20The above-depicted aspects of the Japanese music milieu fuel male and
   female migration in a different way. Whereas female musicians seek
   liberation from an oppressive “gender order” (Ehara, 2001) which leaves
   hardly any space for their professional aspirations, male musicians
   head for Europe in the belief that musicianship there is associated
   with social prestige and that they will be able to find a reputable
   post (soloist position). Their life stories demonstrate that these
   expectations can be satisfied only to a limited degree, and that this
   is conditioned by the type of career these musicians manage to
   establish, as well as by the country of immigration, and their gender –
   male and female musicians experienced the second stage of their
   professional career in different ways, mostly due to family life.

B. Locked into a career trajectory

     * 3 ______________________________ Note that both career paths are
       structurally constrained, yet these (...)

   21In the second phase of their career, musicians realize that further
   significant career movements become a goal hard to achieve for a
   combination of reasons, including nationality, institutions3
   (Allmendinger/Hackman/Lehman, 1996), age, and musical specialization.
   Notwithstanding this combination of impediments, musicians who are
   unable to move their career or family life back to Japan, tend to “cool
   out” (Goffman, 1952) and adapt to the circumstances of the receiving
   country, where they develop a life mode that both provides grounds for
   rationalizations to continue their musicianship and substitutes for
   aspirations (status) that cannot be fully satisfied abroad. The main
   differences in the career process stem from the type of career pursued,
   but they are also divided along gender lines : (1) male musicians
   continue musicianship by combining the prestige of an orchestra
   position alongside activities outside this work which compensate for
   its unsatisfactory status (defined by low job discretion, routine,
   transparency of the orchestra member playing in unison) ; (2) female
   musicians find fulfillment in both the professional and private spheres
   of their life by assuming the life stability of a mother, who is then
   socially permitted to take up a regular work activity. Women’s
   acceptance of their professional situation is forged always in relation
   to their presupposed role and status in their home country.

   22What both male and female musicians have in common, however, is the
   fact that each category has achieved a certain life trajectory, the
   abandonment of which would generate costs higher than maintaining it.
   In other words, these musicians are locked into a career trajectory
   conditioned in a number of ways (by nationality, gender, age, civil
   status, Japanese social practices and institutions in the sphere of
   music and family life, country of immigration), although each of them
   distinguishes itself from the other with its own peculiarities. I shall
   first elaborate on elements that constitute both of the two identified
   trajectory patterns, and then examine some extreme cases of musicians
   who eventually drifted away from music.

1. Male musicians – redefining professional status after hours

   23Male musicians aim more often than women at a prestigious status
   (i.e., soloist posts or a solo stand in the orchestra) and career
   advancement. Yet, Asian socio-cultural origins act as a source of
   stereotypes, typecasting Japanese instrumentalists as technically
   skilled performers, whose playing, however, can reveal their
   insufficient musicality, undermining their endeavors to compete for
   reputable positions. Ethnicity thus decides about the Japanese music
   capabilities, as demonstrated by the passage below :

     If French and Asians perform the same piece, the later has to be
     twice or three times as good as the former to get any recognition.
     That is my impression. The French are simply given preference. I
     find nothing strange about it. It has nothing to do with nationalism
     or anything (Man, violin, forties, France).

   24Having realized that their position on the local music market is far
   from privileged, irrespective of their competences which are frequently
   confirmed with certificates from top music academies (i.e., CNSMDP,
   FCUM), some male musicians may try their chances in Japan.
   Unfortunately, their experiences teach them that integration into the
   Japanese music market after having spent years abroad is not easy,
   especially if they seek professional advancement. A failure to make
   desirable occupational changes is a crucial reason for continuing their
   careers abroad, as illustrated by the evidence below :

     At one point, I was really exhausted, and thought that I’d rather go
     back to Japan than stay here, but it didn’t go well, and here I am,
     like I was back then. Well, a post vacated in a Japanese orchestra
     and I tried out for the audition, but I failed. For one moment, I
     really wanted to quit the place where I am now. At that time, I just
     got tired. I felt that it wasn’t interesting anymore. When you’ve
     been doing it (playing) for dozens of years, it just happens one
     day. Over the twenty years that passed, I’ve experienced many
     different situations. Let’s take compositions, for instance, the
     ensemble usually plays 3 or 4 pieces every week. There are good
     classic artworks, and then there is the contemporary music, which is
     so chaotic that you can’t make head or tail of it, but you have to
     play it. It makes me tired and bored sometimes. Of course, I play
     the best way I can, but I’m unable to feel any pleasure playing the
     music. Here I belong to tutti, but in Japan I passed the audition
     for the top position. What went wrong ? I presume, it was my
     inability to keep eye contact and effective communication with the
     other top musician. In Japan, it is very important to be careful
     while working with others, and I just didn’t know that, because when
     I play I’m kind of concentrated on what I’m doing at a specific
     moment. I intended to become a top player in a Japanese orchestra
     and then develop my solo career (Man, cello, sixties, France).

   25At the same time, musicians dissatisfied with their professional
   status develop an alternative professional life, where they can follow
   their aesthetic plans and preferences (i.e., present their skills on
   stage performing solo a repertoire they personally selected) that
   provide a status that better matches their aspirations. A trombonist
   explained his decision to launch a subsequent artistic enterprise in
   the following way :

     We established the quartet because we wanted to create music
     independently and autonomously, because when you play in the
     orchestra you have to play the way the conductor tells you to and
     you have no choice (Man, trombone, fifties, Poland).

   26Therefore, on the one hand, on orchestra position does not seem to be
   a dream job for male instrumentalists, who aim at soloist careers due
   to the numerous limitations an orchestra imposes on its members. Such
   aspects include (1) monotony (repetitiveness of tasks) and routine
   (short performing time, unison sound in the tutti section) ; (2) lack
   of impact on the performance content – low job discretion
   (Allmendinger/Hackman/Lehman, 1996 :194) – in that both the selection
   and interpretation of the repertoire (the object of the work) lie in
   hands of the artistic management of the institution or the conductor ;
   and (3) few artistic/technical challenges, all of which affect
   professional satisfaction among symphony musicians (Westby, 1960). On
   the other hand, the stable income and easy resolution of residence and
   work permit issues that an orchestral position guarantees, leaves a
   space for the creation of a proxy position, which substitutes for the
   desired social status. In such instances, male musicians ground their
   professional identification (Becker/Strauss, 1956) more on the activity
   carried out outside their workplace. This strategy helps them to
   rationalize and accept their “modest” career in the orchestra.

2. Female musicians – limited living stability instead of occupational
ambitions

   27The majority of female musicians believe that by establishing
   themselves in Europe they managed to leave behind a complex “glass
   ceiling” (Morrison/White/Velsor, 1987 ; Buscatto/Marry, 2009) combining
   the mechanisms of rigidly defined gender roles and class affiliation
   that pushes women out of the productive sphere, and would have
   undermined their professional ambitions had they stayed in Japan. An
   examination of their situation reveals a different kind of
   intersectional trap they fall into in Europe, one which is their
   ethnicity (nationality) and socio-cultural origins, as well as their
   age, marital status and gender. Therefore, paradoxically, in seeking to
   bypass the limitations of the music milieu in their home country, these
   women find themselves facing a disparate set of obstacles which frames
   their professional path in a no less restricting manner in Europe than
   it would in Japan. In continuing their career in Europe, these Japanese
   female musicians sustain their belief in the success of the
   emancipation (from a patriarchal gender order) project that has brought
   them all the way from Japan to Europe.

   28Based on the type of work activity, marital status and country of
   residence, the career trajectories of female musicians split further
   into three patterns : (1) full-time working mothers ; (2) freelancing
   mothers focused on family life ; and (3) freelance single female
   musicians determined to stay in Europe, working to prolong their visas
   and support themselves.

a. Social emancipation of full-time working mothers

     * 4 ______________________________ In this respect, Japanese women
       resemble Irish women, who migrated t (...)

   29These women attach high importance to the possibility of turning
   their musical technique into an occupation, forging a career4 in
   Europe, and hence obtaining relative financial stability through their
   job (regardless of their civil status). The interaction of several
   categorizing elements combine to construct the social position of an
   individual ; these include age, education, class and ethnic origins, as
   well as the instrument played. These narrow these women’s employment
   chances, as illustrated by the following quote :

     You have to expect that around 30-40 candidates will apply for one
     post (one of the violinists said that today there are approximately
     80 candidates for one violin post). In the case of oboe, there are
     only a few positions, so you are really lucky when a position
     becomes vacant. (...) The idea to give up the instrument altogether
     has never even crossed my mind. (…) I’d passed some twenty auditions
     in different European countries (Germany, Switzerland, Finland and
     of course, France), but I wasn’t accepted anywhere. (…) I just
     didn’t want to stay in Europe just to ‘be in Europe’, I wanted to be
     able to work here. (...) I really practiced a lot, honestly. So
     much, that even I myself was convinced that I was really doing my
     best. I was so determined to get a job. And there were hard moments.
     In Germany, for instance, in the last stage of the audition they
     asked me if I had a valid visa and when I said “no” someone from the
     selection committee responded that they were looking for a really
     passionate musician and not for a person who was most probably
     seeking a job to get a visa. Still I didn’t want to give up. (…) I
     blew the instrument for so many hours, driven by the thought that
     what I wanted most was to get into an orchestra. (…) I passed more
     than twenty auditions to get here, where I work now. This was the
     twenty-fifth, can you imagine ? (Woman, forties, oboe, France).

   30In the given circumstances these women find professional satisfaction
   in having landed any stable position in an orchestra or in academia.
   Once they have a family, Japanese women “cool out” (Goffman, 1952) and
   learn to

     redirect their concerns away from the place of work toward other
     scenes in their social life, (…) turn(ing) down those experiences
     that they can actively shape for themselves, toward those places
     where they can be somebody special, and where they can retreat from
     the occupational career struggle as well as some of the duller and
     even degrading moments of music making in the symphony (p.347).

   31Work attains a different meaning for female-married musicians in the
   second stage of their professional life. It furnishes them with life
   stability in terms of their legal (visa, work permit) status ;
   socio-economic independence from their husband and conjugal contract ;
   social benefits ; regular working hours, which leave time for family
   life ; paid leave and maternity leave ; health and social insurance ;
   and a pension. Thus the work-life balance achieved creates alternative
   grounds on which these women redefine their social role, fitting it
   into the working mother pattern. Faulkner (1973) described this type of
   additional gratification located in private life (i.e., time spent with
   children, family, partner, hobbies) as

     incidental ‘side benefits’ (that) are realized in the private sphere
     (Berger/Kellner, 1964), (and which) have a profound effect on
     dampening motivations to move onward and upward (p.346).

   32The female musicians from the studied group who were full-time
   orchestra members (in Europe) were entitled to maternity leave, and
   thus did not experience institutional pressures to quit their job due
   to care-giving duties.

   33Lastly, there were significant differences between the Polish and
   French institutional infrastructures designed to support working
   mothers. In Poland, structural insufficiencies in the caregiving sector
   force mothers who plan to recapture their professional activity to rely
   on care provided by the family, a support mechanism on which the
   Japanese women living in Poland cannot always count. In France, the
   structural organization of the public support offered to families,
   i.e., relatively easy access to public child care and so-called aides
   au logement (AL), that is, housing benefits intended for households
   that purchase or rent an apartment and which are granted under certain
   conditions, renders the working environment there far more
   mother-friendly. In this sense, motherhood gave the Japanese women
   residing in France the right to profit from social support that partly
   compensated for the ethnic inequalities they experienced when competing
   for positions on the music market. No such mechanisms that could
   alleviate the impact of the social categories that affect one’s power
   position (i.e., gender, ethnicity/nationality, music specialty, class,
   age) exist in Poland, where married Japanese women rarely have the
   opportunity to emancipate themselves from the patriarchal family
   scheme, and remain dependent on their spouses not only economically,
   but also legally (due to visa-related issues).

b. Freelancing mothers in France and Poland

   34The occupational situation of freelancing musician mothers in France,
   who tend to be in relationships with professional musicians, differs
   from that in Poland due to the former group’s access to better work
   opportunities through their spouses, which allows female
   instrumentalists in France to lead a more active occupational life of a
   musician (having jobs almost every day) than their compatriots in
   Poland (occasionally participating in music events). What they share
   are life priorities centered on childrearing and family life.
     * 5 ______________________________ Aside from permanent positions,
       orchestras offer also temporary cont (...)

   35In France musicians of specializations other than the piano (winds,
   strings) usually support themselves by working as orchestra substitutes
   or giving private music lessons5. In addition, music schools contract
   some pianists, where they mainly accompany music students, yet are
   rarely asked to independently lead a music class. What distinguishes
   these women and brings them closer to female musicians from the first
   category is that they too have managed to build a working environment
   that produces a “stability illusion”. Firstly, conjugal relations solve
   work and residence permit issues, while their partners’ profession –
   most of them are married to musicians – facilitates their access to the
   music market. Their daily work agenda is filled with duties (they carry
   out remunerated part-time jobs almost every day, at least three-four
   times a week) but they are to some extent free to choose projects that
   suit them (because their spouse contributes to the household budget).
   Here again, the French welfare system, contrary to that in Poland,
   lends a helping hand to working mothers.

   36In comparison, respondents based in Poland – mostly pianists – set
   their careers in motion around Chopin’s music, which they perform
   occasionally (approximately ten times a year at most) as soloists or
   with small ensembles (three to four people) during festivals, as well
   as at other music events. Additionally, they offer private music
   lessons at home and are also engaged in part-time jobs unrelated to
   music (e.g., translation, interpreting piano lessons for Japanese
   students during master classes held at FCUM twice a year, working a
   tourist guides or writing about Europe in the context of classical
   music for the Japanese media). Since these paid musical events happen
   rather sporadically (several times a week), it is difficult to speak
   about developed work activity, especially if we juxtapose this with
   freelancing in France. This situation shall be ascribed to structural
   conditions within the music market in Poland, which offers less work
   opportunities to classical musicians. Yet no less important is the fact
   that the Japanese in Poland have established families with
   professionals from sectors other than music (media, marketing,
   accounting, consulting). These men scarcely encourage their wives to
   continue their musicianship, nor can they meditate adequate working
   opportunities ; however, they do not prevent their partners-musicians
   from playing. Women confess that they can count on their husband’s
   support (i.e., aid in childcare) whenever they want to participate in a
   music project. In this sense, a Western family model, where both
   partners engage in professional activity, is also operative here,
   allowing these women the opportunity to remain musically active and
   take up work while running a house. However, after having a child,
   Japanese women in Poland suspend their playing altogether, believing
   they can suspend their vocational life until after they return from
   childcare leave, and continue to favor their motherly and housewife
   duties. The interview material documented the hardships of such efforts
   to return, and elicited reflections on how they identified with their
   profession, as documented by the excerpt below :

     I spent really long years at home raising children, and so I had
     plenty of time to think about ‘who we call a pianist’. Is a pianist
     only a person appearing on glittering stages, in the media, the
     press, a person who wins competitions ? Is this the real pianist ?
     And I started thinking that this is only one way. My way is to do
     what only I can do, at a certain time and place, where people need
     me, or want to listen to my performances. That is how in the past
     ten years I have come to be able to get back to work step-by-step. I
     haven’t been recognized with the title of music competition awardee,
     but I played in more familiar places, closer to where I live, in
     small Cultural Centers. There is nothing to be ashamed of when
     performing in a village hall. When you limit the definition of a
     pianist solely to those who are great stars, then you have to ask
     yourself a question : are they still having a splendid career ten or
     twenty years after they had won the competition ? I have managed to
     overcome social opinions, common sense and imagination and my own
     complexes, and this way it seems to me that I have found a place
     where I can be a pianist (Woman, piano, fifties, Poland).

   37The group of women just depicted persist in their modest career in
   the second phase, weaving it out of sporadic music events, providing
   that they cast anew their professional identification as a musician and
   accept their occupational trajectory running a different track than the
   soloist’s model as one possible path among many.

c. Single freelancing Japanese women – working for a visa

     * 6 ______________________________ There is little legal room for
       freelancing musicians in Poland. Afte (...)
     * 7 ______________________________ This solution is not unique to
       France, but is partly implemented in (...)

   38Both French and Polish migration law constrains the scope of artistic
   freelancing for foreigners residing in these countries6. Since 2014
   Polish law does not provide any legal opportunity for freelancing
   artists to engage in their vocation, which means that this category of
   people will completely vanish from the legal sphere. Contrary to this,
   the French legal system had provided a space for foreigners and their
   creative activity, admitting that these people can contribute to the
   development of French culture. Furthermore, France has a long tradition
   of supporting freelancing artists, and the intermittent du spectacle7
   system, which constitutes a living mode for many French artists,
   including legally residing foreign artists, provides but one piece of
   evidence of this fact.

   39Notwithstanding the above, the study’s data demonstrates that in
   either country, Japanese artists, preoccupied with fulfilling
   eligibility criteria, have little time left to make a contribution,
   because they are frequently engaged in activities that do not even
   match their interests, yet in their opinion might have administrative
   value (allow them to extend their work and residence permit). In such
   circumstances, musicians find themselves trapped in a precarious
   situation (i.e., non-stable jobs, changing legal regulations and music
   market conditions), which consequently forces them to accept any job
   they are offered.
     * 8 ______________________________ Khodyakov D. (2007) analyzes
       relationships in the Orpheus orchestra, (...)

   40The research material indicates three interrelated elements that
   generate uncertainty on the level of artistic action : (1) the quality
   of networks (that may “defrost”) (Wagner, 2015) ; (2) the act of
   cooperation itself, which involves other people, is based on mutual
   trust (Faulkner/Anderson, 1987 ; Menger, 2010) and requires conformity
   as well as cooperation with the inner group (Becker, 2008), and the
   “trust-control relationship”8 (Khodyakov, 2007) ; (3) the work
   contract, characterized by a short duration (i.e., one concert, series
   of recording, two-month teaching) and usually its one-off form
   (non-renewable), very often with no or limited social or health
   security, and where remuneration conditions are determined vaguely.

   41Some research points out that freelancing provides musician with
   freedom of choice in that they can select between projects that are
   compatible with their needs and that satisfy their esthetic
   sensibilities (Lehmann, 2002 ; Ravet/Coulangeon, 2003). However, data
   from the interviews shows that musicians frequently accept whatever
   they are offered because they never know what evidence will be
   sufficiently convincing for the immigration officer to prolong their
   residence permit. In other words, since migration law is modified quite
   frequently, musicians organize their activity strategically,
   diversifying their occupational activity to increase their chances in
   the “visa game” as one pianist describes it :

     The Compétences et talents card is granted to artists who do a great
     deal of things even if they do not have fixed employment. I have a
     fixed job, yet at the same time, I have students in individual
     lessons, and I play concerts and record CDs. I’m trying to diversify
     my activities, you never know when and how the law will change
     (Woman, piano, thirties, France).

   42The interviewed musicians confessed that they try to make their
   timetables and themselves as flexible as possible, ready to accept any
   offers (for a concert, festival, recordings) that might arise (“if you
   refuse, they might not call you again”). They practice mastering a
   repertoire and broadening it in order to be able to respond to varied
   market needs (Faulkner/Anderson, 1987) and thus pay the rent or renew
   their visas. If the cooperation terminates, the musician might lose
   right to reside and work in the country.

   43Becker and Strauss (1956) argued that a

     ‘fine artist’ may be committed to artistic ideals but seize upon
     whatever jobs are at hand to help him toward creative goals. When he
     takes a job in order to live, he thereby risks committing himself to
     an alternative occupational career ; and artists and writers do,
     indeed, get weaned away from the exercise of their art in just this
     way (p.260).

   44Freelancers more often take up commercial projects whose performance
   is not as technically demanding as the playing of classical pieces of
   music, and hence their skills are exposed to “deskilling” (Kofman,
   2012, 2016). Progressive deskilling is risky since insufficient
   technique may one day exclude them from the market.

   45Regardless of their precarious working situation and ambiguous
   professional identification, freelancing musicians do not give up on
   their musicianship. They make an effort to carry on with their careers,
   less for financial reasons (to contribute to the family budget, or to
   earn pocket money) than for the need to stay professionally active,
   even to a limited extent, and out of a fear of losing their music
   skills, the acquirement of which required at great expense in terms of
   time, money and personal commitment (discipline of practicing
   regularly). In light of this, the question then arises : why do some
   musicians eventually give up their musicianship ?

C. Swerving careers

   46A professional change for a musician is never an easy decision, as
   the cost of entering the profession is extremely high, as Sorignet
   (2004) evidenced in his study about retiring modern dancers. For the
   musician, it means that she has invested in vain a great amount of time
   and effort expended in mastering the instrument, and long hours of
   training at the expense of acquiring other skills (in science, for
   example). She must look for an alternative vocational route.

   47The research data shows us that musicians do resign in the second
   phase of their careers. This is not an abrupt cutoff, but rather a slow
   process, at the end of which they do maintain some music-related
   activity. The group studied contains two examples of professional
   conversion, but only one of them is relevant for the analysis presented
   in this paper. The first one occurred right after graduation from music
   studies, when the instrumentalist failed to find any occupation linked
   to music skills possessed. This example suggests that full withdrawal
   happens very rarely when a person is unable to find any music-related
   job or when entering musicianship was never the person’s individual
   decision, but rather the fulfillment of parental dreams.

   48The person, who progressively diversified her career, previously
   worked in academia and for an orchestra, occasionally giving recitals
   (a few times a year). Having reached a certain age (her thirties), she
   realized that further upward career mobility would be virtually
   impossible, so she started developing non-music related activities. We
   need to remember that age is a crucial element in a musician’s career.
   This thirty-year-old pianist was aware of the slim chances she had to
   experience a turning point in their career. As in the case of the
   athletes examined by Adlers (1985), musicians’ social status evolves
   from belief to disbelief, as they compare themselves to other
   virtuosos, verifying their chances in the labor market, in the context
   of their age, networks and skills. A process of “pragmatic detachment”
   (Adler/Adler, 1985) from the goal of becoming a professional musician
   unfolds similarly to the one experienced by athletes, who learn that
   their chances of becoming a professional sportsman are incredibly slim,
   even more difficult than graduating from university. Musicians seem to
   realize that they cannot wait endlessly for their “chance”, doing other
   things and trying to maintain their skills at a high level.

   49In the case of the above-mentioned woman, her career-related
   self-consciousness was accompanied by her plans in private life, namely
   her wish to have a baby. A stable, contracted position was supposed to
   provide her with the privileges of full-time employment, such as social
   and health insurance, a pension, paid sick and maternity leave, which
   she would benefit from as a mother. This case demonstrates an
   “occupational role progression” trajectory (Goffman, 1959). After a
   person has reached certain age, if her career has not developed beyond
   a certain threshold, she gradually shifts to different career path and
   prepares to enter a different stage of life (childrearing). As Becker
   and Strauss (1956) contended

     (w)hen careers are in danger of being brought to an abrupt end – as
     with airplane pilots – then, before retirement, other kinds of
     careers may be prepared for or entered. This precaution is very
     necessary. When generalized mobility is an aim, specific routes may
     be chosen for convenience sake (p. 260).

   50In the case of the mother-musician, it is plausible that an
   alternative career path was etched in her life-plan, which included
   enlarging her family sometime in the future.

IV. Conclusion

   51Japanese female and male musicians who settle in Europe propelled by
   the dream of socio-professional emancipation from the constraints
   imposed in Japan, persist in careers which do not match these
   expectations in hardly any aspect. Previous studies of modest careers
   in the art world have spotlighted numerous aspects that characterize
   these professional artistic trajectories, focusing in particular on the
   scarcity of stable positions and related-job insecurity as well as
   their precariousness (Coulangeon, 2004), which force artists (including
   musicians) to engage in multiple art-related activities
   (Bureau/Perrenoud/Shapiro, 2009) and, in consequence, lead a “double
   life” (Lahire, 2006). Scholars have also frequently brought to the fore
   age (Westby, 1960 ; Wagner, 2015) and gender as (Ravet/Coulangeon,
   2003 ; Ravet, 2007) as two traits that lay the grounds for
   discriminatory practices still institutionally sanctioned, especially
   in the conservative world of classical music. Extant research has
   explained a subjective devotion to artistic creation that overcomes the
   above-depicted professional hardships through a “passion” for art (and
   music), usually coupled with an artistic “vocation” (Moulin, 1983 ;
   Lehmann, 2002 ; Heinich, 2005 ; Buscatto, 2007).

   52An intersectional analysis of the occupational paths in Europe of
   Japanese musicians provides us with a more complex view, and hence a
   more multidimensional understanding, of modest artistic (international)
   careers since it embraces all the above-mentioned elements (i.e., the
   specificity of the music labor market characterized by job insecurity,
   precariousness ; gender and age) and additionally combines them with
   ethnicity and (related) migration status, and local migration law
   alongside the social and cultural capital that musicians acquire during
   their stay abroad. The latter set of career features remains
   significant in particular for artists who are non-EU citizens seeking
   to establish themselves in Europe, in that these features frame and
   fuel modest careers in their second stage.

   53A passion for music tied with gender roles as defined in Japanese
   society have triggered “emancipation projects” that navigated Japanese
   musicians to Europe. If they continue their European careers, which are
   generally far from the ideal model of a career in music, it is because
   1) they have already achieved some “limited occupational activity” as
   migrants, 2) withdrawing from this path would put at stake this
   stability and require them to admit an emancipatory failure, or 3)
   those who have established households (in particular female musicians)
   cannot easily transplant their non-Japanese families to Japan. In this
   sense, their modest careers at the second stage reveal a compromise
   between what is desired (a passion for music and aesthetic
   satisfaction), what is professionally achievable (in France and Poland)
   for both male and female Japanese migrant artists, and what is expected
   upon an eventual return to Japan.
   Haut de page

Bibliographie

   Adler P. A., Adler P.,
   1985 “From Idealism to Pragmatic Detachment : The AcademicPerformance
   of College Athletes”, Sociology of Education, 58(4), pp.241-250.

   Allmendinger J., Hackman J. R., Lehman E. V.,
   1996 “Life and Work in Symphony Orchestras”, The Musical Quarterly,
   80(2), pp.194-219.

   Ando R.,
   2010 Chieko Hara-a life and art, Thesis/Dissertation ETD, University of
   Washington.

   Becker H. S.,
   2008 Art Worlds, Berkeley, University of California Press, [1982].

   Becker H. S., Strauss A.,
   1956 “Careers, Personality, and Adult Socialization”, American Journal
   of Sociology, 62(3), pp.253-263.

   Bureau M-C., Perrenoud M., Shapiro R. (eds.),
   2009 L'artiste pluriel : démultiplier l'activité pour vivre de son art,
   Lille, P.U. du Septentrion.

   Buscatto M.,
   2007 Femmes du jazz. Musicalités, féminités, marginalisations, Paris,
   CNRS Éditions.

   Buscatto M., Marry C.,
   2009 “Le ‘plafond de verre’ dans tous ses éclats. La féminisation des
   professions supérieures au XX^ème siècle - Introduction du numéro
   spécial”, Sociologie du travail, 51(2), pp.170-182.

   Coulangeon Ph.,
   2004 Les Musiciens interprètes en France. Portrait d'une profession,
   Paris, La Documentation française.

   Crenshaw K. W.,
   1995 “Mapping the Margins : Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and
   Violence against Women of Color”, dans Crenshaw K., Gotanda N., Peller
   G., Thomas K., Critical Race Theory. The Key Writing that formed the
   movement, New York, The New Press, pp.357-383.

   Ehara Y.,
   2001 Jendā chitsujo [The Gender Order],Tokyo, Keisoshobo.

   Faulkner R.,
   1973 “Career Concerns and Mobility Motivations of Orchestra Musicians”,
   The Sociological Quarterly, 14, pp.334-349.
   1983 Music on Demand, New Brunswick, Transaction.

   Faulkner R., Anderson A.,
   1987 “Short-Term Projects and Emergent Careers : Evidence from
   Hollywood”, American Journal of Sociology, 92(4), pp.879-909.

   Goffman E.,
   1952 “On Cooling the Mark Out. Some Aspects of Adaptation to Failure”,
   Psychiatry, 15(4), pp.451-463.
   1959 The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, New York, Anchor Books,
   Doubleday.

   Heinich N.,
   2005 L' élite artiste. Excellence et singularité en régime
   démocratique. Paris, Gallimard.

   Hughes E. C.,
   1962 “Good People and Dirty Work”, Social Problems, 10(1), pp.3-11.
   1971 The Sociological Eye : Selected Papers, Chicago, Aldine Atherton.

   Ishikawa Y.,
   2001 Hara Chieko. Densetsu no pianisuto [Hara Chieko. Legendary
   pianist], Tokyo, Besuto Shinsho.

   Khodyakov D.,
   2007 “The Complexity of Trust - Control Relationships in Creative
   Organizations : Insights from a Qualitative Analysis of a Conductorless
   Orchestra”, Social Forces, 86(1), pp.1-22.

   Kofman E.,
   2012 “Gender and skilled migration in Europe”, Cuadernos de Relaciones
   Laborales, 30(1), pp.63-89.
   2016 “Globalization and Labour Migrations”, in Edgell S., Granter E.,
   Gottfried H., The Sage Handbook of the Sociology of Work and
   Employment, edited by, London, Sage, pp.597-615.

   Lahire B.,
   2006 La condition littéraire. La double vie des écrivains, Paris, La
   Découverte.

   Lehmann B.,
   2002 L’orchestre dans tous ses éclats, Paris, La Découverte.

   Menger P-M.,
   1998 “Le travail et l’invention artistiques : Les figures de
   l’incertitude”, Revue belge de Musicologie, 52, pp.165-174.
   2010 “Les artistes en quantités. Ce que sociologues et économistes
   s’apprennent sur le travail et les professions artistiques”, Revue
   d'économie politique, 120(1), pp.205-236.

   Merton R. K.,
   1984 “Socially expected durations : a case study of concept formation
   in sociology”, in Powell W.W., Robbins R. (eds.), Conflict and
   Consensus : A Festschrift for Lewis A. Coser, New York, The Free Press,
   pp.262-283.

   Morrison A. M., White R. P., Velsor E.,
   1987 Breaking The Glass Ceiling : Can Women Reach The Top Of America's
   Largest Corporations?, Cambridge, Perseus Publishing.

   Moulin R.,
   1983 “De l'artisan au professionnel : l'artiste”, Sociologie du
   travail, 25(4), pp.388-403.

   Ravet H.,
   2007 “Devenir clarinettiste : Carrières féminines en milieu masculin”,
   Actes de la recherche en sciences sociales, 168(3), pp.50-67.

   Ravet H., Coulangeon Ph.,
   2003 “La division sexuelle du travail chez les musiciens français”,
   Sociologie du travail, 45(3), pp.361-384.

   Sayad A.,
   1999 La double absence. Des illusions de l’émigré aux souffrances de
   l’immigré, Paris, Seuil.

   Sorignet P-E.,
   2004 “Sortir d'un métier de vocation : le cas des danseurs
   contemporains”, Sociétés contemporaines, 56(4), pp.111-132.

   Stalker P.,
   1994 The work of Strangers : A Survey of International Labour
   Migration, Geneva, International Labour Office.

   Taniguchi Y.,
   2000 “The training of musicians in Japan's four-year colleges”, in
   Froehlich H. C., Chesky K. S. (ed.), The Education of the professional
   musician, Langhorne, Harwood Academic Publishers, pp.9-24.

   Wagner I.,
   2015 Producing Excellence. The Making of Virtuosos, New Brunswick,
   Rutgers University Press.

   Watanabe M.,
   1982 “Pourquoi les Japonais aiment-ils la musique européenne”, Revue
   internationale des sciences sociales, XXXIV(4), pp.709-719.

   Westby D. L.,
   1960 “The Career Experience of the Symphony Musician”, Social Forces,
   38(3), pp.223-30.

   Winker G., Degele N.,
   2011 “Intersectionality as multi-level analysis : Dealing with social
   inequality”, European Journal of Women’s Studies, 18(1), pp.51-66.

   Yang M.,
   2007 “East Meets West in the Concert Hall : Asians and Classical Music
   in the Century of Imperialism, Post-Colonialism, and Multiculturalism”,
   Asian Music, 38(1), pp.1-30.

   Yoshihara M.,
   2008 Musicians from a Different Shore : Asians and Asian Americans in
   Classical Music, Chicago, Temple University Press.
   Haut de page

Annexe

Structured Summary

   Presentation : Previous studies of modest careers in the art world have
   spotlighted numerous aspects that characterize these professional
   artistic trajectories, focusing in particular on the scarcity of stable
   positions and related-job insecurity as well as their precariousness
   (Coulangeon, 2004), which force artists (including musicians) to engage
   in multiple art-related activities (Bureau/Perrenoud/Shapiro, 2009)
   and, in consequence, lead a “double life” (Lahire, 2006). Scholars have
   also frequently brought to the fore age (Westby, 1960 ; Wagner, 2015)
   and gender as (Ravet/Coulangeon, 2003 ; Ravet, 2007) as two traits that
   lay the grounds for discriminatory practices still institutionally
   sanctionned, especially in the conservative world of classical music.
   Extant research has explained a subjective devotion to artistic
   creation that overcomes the above-depicted professional hardships
   through a “passion” for art (and music), usually coupled with an
   artistic “vocation” (Moulin, 1983 ; Lehmann, 2002 ; Heinich, 2005 ;
   Buscatto, 2007). The purpose of this article is to demonstrate how male
   and female Japanese musicians inhabit a disparate socio-cultural
   context – both in France and Poland – as they continue their music
   career into its second phase, adapting to a failure to translate their
   music skills into a soloist career, which is considered the model path
   in the social world of classical music (Westby, 1960 ; Faulkner, 1973 ;
   Wagner, 2015).

   Method : The demonstration developed in this article is based on
   material retrieved with the use of three kinds of qualitative tools :
   semi-structured in-depth interviews, irregular observation, and both
   quantitative and qualitative analysis of extant data : statistics from
   websites and archives (private and institutional). The main evidence
   for tracing the experience of the first stage of musicians’ careers
   from a retrospective standpoint comes from qualitative, semi-structured
   individual interviews conducted with Japanese musicians in their mother
   tongue. 50 semi-structured interviews were carried out with male and
   female Japanese classical musicians of various specializations in their
   mother tongue. These individuals were recruited for the study on
   condition of having experience with being educated and leading a
   professional and private life in Europe (i.e., 25 interviewees were
   based in France and 25 in Poland). The vast majority of respondents
   consisted of professionally active, long-term sojourners age 30-45,
   most of whom were female pianists, especially in the Polish group. In
   addition to that I also examined 45 careers of Japanese musicians as
   presented in music competition catalogues, in the press in the form of
   interviews or articles, and on websites. To verify my findings, I
   discussed the material with 20 professionals, whom I call “experts”
   from the music milieu (i.e., music professors, sound directors,
   orchestra musicians, etc.), who had previously cooperated with Japanese
   musicians.

   Theory : This analysis foregrounds ethnicity (nationality),
   socio-cultural origins, and socially contextualized gender as the most
   significant elements in the second stage of the career-making process.
   It focuses on the endeavors of both male and female musicians to remain
   in the profession, in the face of a number of interrelated sources of
   inequality (i.e., socio-cultural origins, ethnicity, gender and class)
   (Winker/Degele, 2011) that have a structuring impact on their
   professional and life decisions. This analysis foregrounds ethnicity
   (nationality), socio-cultural origins, and socially contextualized
   gender as the most significant elements in the second stage of the
   career-making process. In other words, this article takes an
   intersectional stance (Crenshaw, 1995) to examine the process of
   performing a “modest” career in music for male and female Japanese
   migrant artists as a process of “working out a compromise” between what
   is desired (a passion for music and aesthetic satisfaction), what is
   professionally achievable (in France and Poland), and what is expected
   upon an eventual return to Japan.

   Results : The article shows that a passion for music tied with gender
   roles as defined in Japanese society have triggered “emancipation
   projects” that navigated Japanese musicians to Europe. If they continue
   their European careers, which are generally far from the ideal model of
   a career in music, it is because 1) they have already achieved some
   “limited occupational activity” as migrants, 2) withdrawing from this
   path would put at stake this stability and re-quire them to admit an
   emancipatory failure, or 3) those who have established households (in
   particular female musicians) cannot easily transplant their
   non-Japanese families to Japan. In this sense, their modest careers at
   the second stage reveal a compromise between what is desired (a passion
   for music and aesthetic satisfaction), what is professionally
   achievable (in France and Poland) for both male and female Japanese
   migrant artists, and what is expected upon an eventual return to Japan.

   Discussion : This article contributes to sociological studies of
   creative careers. The framework developed in this article shall help
   examine and understand various conditions that shape professional
   musicianship and at the same time affect the im-/possibility of
   remaining in the profession in the second stage. The application of an
   intersectional approach to the occupational paths of transnational
   musicians provides us with a more multidimensional understanding of
   modest artistic (international) careers, since it embraces such
   elements as ex. the specificity of the music labor market characterized
   by job insecurity, precariousness ; gender and age and additionally
   combines them with ethnicity and (related) migration status, and local
   migration law alongside the social and cultural capital that musicians
   acquire during their stay abroad.
   Haut de page

Notes

   1 ______________________________ It is interesting to note here the
   proliferation of knowledge about the benefits of early engagement in
   music education, which seems to be broader in Japan than in European
   countries, where it remains frequently reserved for families with
   musical socio-professional origins.

   2 ______________________________ There were approximately 5-11
   orchestras in Tokyo in 1982, depending on the source of data (Watanabe
   M., 1982, p.715). In March 2016 the Association of Japanese Symphony
   Orchestras (established in 1990 and recognized as a corporate juridical
   person by the Japanese Ministry of Culture and Science, Monbukagakusho)
   associated 34 professional orchestras in Japan,
   http://www.orchestra.or.jp/about/federation/, accessed 2 April 2017.

   3 ______________________________ Note that both career paths are
   structurally constrained, yet these constraints interrelate differently
   with nationality. Posts in academia in France and Poland belong to the
   public sector, which prevents an influx of foreigners by having raised
   institutional obstacles (i.e., a specific career path in the course of
   which a person attains subsequent grades and diplomas). Furthermore,
   top positions (the first instrument in the section) are scarce, and
   become vacant only when the former top musician retires due to age
   constraints, or for personal reasons. Orchestras may favor musicians
   with the same nationality, but these are informal impediments (e.g.
   informal favoring local candidates over foreigners driven by the
   policies of orchestra unions). It is then it this sense that the world
   of orchestra seems to be much more inclusive when it comes to
   foreigners in comparison to academia.

   4 ______________________________ In this respect, Japanese women
   resemble Irish women, who migrated to UK or United States, seeking
   social emancipation (Stalker P., 1994), as well as Italian women, who
   were leaving the country propelled by similar reasons (Kofman E.,
   2012).

   5 ______________________________ Aside from permanent positions,
   orchestras offer also temporary contracts, when the performed
   repertoire requires larger ensembles. For example Gustav Mahler’s
   Symphony No. 8 engages 44 violinists.

   6 ______________________________ There is little legal room for
   freelancing musicians in Poland. After the law changed in 2014,
   freelancers apply for the stay permit as “Other”, having to justify
   their reasons for staying in Poland (for example participation in a
   volunteer program), and to prove a regular monthly income that covers
   living costs equal to the amount that entitles a person to social
   security benefits, which was calculated to be 674PLN, approximately 160
   EUR for a single person household,
   http://www.wsoic.lublin.uw.gov.pl/pl/content/z-dniem-1-maja-2014-r-wcho
   dzi-w-zycie-nowa-ustawa-o-cudzoziemcach-z-dnia-12-grudnia-2013-r,
   accessed 8 February 2016. The lawmaker France offers more possibilities
   for freelancing artists. One of them is Carte compétences et talents
   (Skills and talent card), which since 2006 has been intended for
   artists, who plan to carry out a remunerated or non-remunerated
   activity for a maximum of four years. An obstacle in the application
   process for the mentioned card, may constitute an annual gross income,
   which the lawmakers specified as being equal to, or higher than
   53,289.60 EUR,
   https://www.service-public.fr/particuliers/vosdroits/F16922, accessed
   10 March 2017.

   7 ______________________________ This solution is not unique to France,
   but is partly implemented in Luxemburg
   (http://www.guichet.public.lu/citoyens/fr/loisirs-benevolat/culture-tou
   risme/statut-artiste/intermittent- spectacle/index.html, accessed 19
   July 2017) and Belgium
   (http://smartbe.be/fr/sinformer/chomage/comment-evolue-mon-allocation-d
   e-chomage-dans-le-temps-2/exception-pour-artiste-et-technicien-du-secte
   ur-artistique-la-protection-de-lintermittence/, accessed 19 July 2017).
   Cfr, e.g., Menger P-M., 1998, 2010 ; Coulangeon Ph., 2004 ; Buscatto
   M., 2007.

   8 ______________________________ Khodyakov D. (2007) analyzes
   relationships in the Orpheus orchestra, the world’s largest
   contemporary conductorless orchestra.
   Haut de page

Pour citer cet article

Référence papier

   Beata M. Kowalczyk, « Professional Aspirations in Exile », Recherches
   sociologiques et anthropologiques, 50-2 | 2019, 101-122.

Référence électronique

   Beata M. Kowalczyk, « Professional Aspirations in Exile », Recherches
   sociologiques et anthropologiques [En ligne], 50-2 | 2019, mis en ligne
   le 01 décembre 2019, consulté le 30 novembre 2022. URL :
   http://journals.openedition.org/rsa/3494 ; DOI :
   https://doi.org/10.4000/rsa.3494
   Haut de page

Auteur

Beata M. Kowalczyk

   Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznan, Poland.
   Haut de page

Droits d’auteur

   CC-BY-NC-ND-4.0

   Creative Commons - Attribution - Pas d'Utilisation Commerciale - Pas de
   Modification 4.0 International - CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

   https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
   Haut de page
   Sommaire - Document précédent - Document suivant

Navigation

Index

     * Auteurs
     * Index de mots-clés

Numéros en texte intégral

     * 202152-1 | 52-2
     * 202051-1 | 51-2
     * 201950-1 | 50-2
     * 201849-1 | 49-2
     * 201748-1 | 48-2
     * 201647-1 | 47-2
     * 201546-1 | 46-2
     * 201445-1 | 45-2
     * 201344-1 | 44-2
     * 201243-1 | HS | 43-2
     * 201142-1 | 42-2
     * 201041-1 | 41-2
     * 200940-1 | 40-2
     * 200839-1 | 39-2
     * 200738-1 | 38-2
     * 200637-1 | 37-2

Tous les numéros

La revue

     * Comités
     * Critères de publication

Actualité

     * Numéros en préparation

Appels à contributions

     * Appels en cours

Informations

     * Mentions légales & crédits
     * Contacts
     * Politiques de publication

Suivez-nous

     * Flux RSS Flux RSS

Lettres d’information

     * La Lettre d’OpenEdition

Affiliations/partenaires

     * Logo Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques
     * Logo Fondation universitaire
     * Logo Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique
     * DOAJ - Directory of Open Access Journals
     * OpenEdition Journals

   ISSN électronique 2033-7485

   Voir la notice dans le catalogue OpenEdition

   Plan du site – Mentions légales & crédits – Flux de syndication

   Politique de confidentialité – Gestion des cookies

   Nous adhérons à OpenEdition – Édité avec Lodel – Accès réservé

   (BUTTON)

   Rechercher dans OpenEdition Search

   Vous allez être redirigé vers OpenEdition Search
   ____________________
   ( ) Dans tout OpenEdition
   (*) Dans Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques
   (BUTTON) Rechercher

     * Français
          + English

     * Partager
          + Facebook
          + Twitter
          + Google+

   ">
   (BUTTON)

     * Accueil
     * Catalogue des 595 revues

   OpenEdition Search
   (BUTTON) Tout OpenEdition

   (BUTTON) Français
     * English

   Portail de ressources électroniques en sciences humaines et sociales
   OpenEdition
   Nos plateformes
   OpenEdition Books OpenEdition Journals Hypotheses Calenda
   Bibliothèques et institutions
   OpenEdition Freemium
   Nos services
   OpenEdition Search La lettre d'OpenEdition
   Suivez-nous
