   #alternate An Iranian Exile Channels Her Trauma Into Film

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Sections
   (BUTTON) SEARCH
   Skip to contentSkip to site index
   Movies

   Today’s Paper

   Movies|An Iranian Exile Channels Her Trauma Into Film
   https://www.nytimes.com/2022/10/22/movies/zar-amir-ebrahimi-holy-spider
   .html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

   Supported by
   Continue reading the main story

   Reporter’s Notebook

An Iranian Exile Channels Her Trauma Into Film

   Zar Amir Ebrahimi, who had to flee Iran after an intimate tape was
   leaked, has been transfixed by the protests erupting there as her film
   “Holy Spider” is released in the U.S.
     * Send any friend a story
       As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month.
       Anyone can read what you share.
       (BUTTON)
       (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)

   “I sometimes think, for an actress, I’m happy to have this much pain in
   my life,” said Zar Amir Ebrahimi, adding, “I put everything into the
   movie, all my life.”
   “I sometimes think, for an actress, I’m happy to have this much pain in
   my life,” said Zar Amir Ebrahimi, adding, “I put everything into the
   movie, all my life.”Credit...Elliott Verdier for The New York Times
   Roger Cohen

   By Roger Cohen

   The writer reported from Iran at the time of the 2009 protests, and
   from elsewhere in the region. He reported from Paris for this
   interview.
   Oct. 22, 2022

   “I know that fear, I know that humiliation,” Zar Amir Ebrahimi, the
   winner of the best actress award at this year’s Cannes Film Festival,
   said in a recent interview. “I know how men in Iran use their power to
   keep you quiet.”

   Ebrahimi is an Iranian exile who, in 2008, decided she had to flee
   after being subjected to a smear campaign based on her love life. Now,
   that experience and her role in the film “Holy Spider,” which opens in
   theaters in the United States on Oct. 28, have intersected with
   disarming intensity, as women in Iran burn their head scarves to
   protest the oppression of the Islamic Republic.

   The story of Rahimi, the fictional investigative journalist at the
   heart of “Holy Spider,” is one of female defiance in the face of male
   violence. Based on the true story of Saeed Hanaei, a serial killer who
   preyed on prostitutes in the Iranian city of Mashhad, a religious
   center, the movie traces with unflinching, sometimes harrowing,
   intimacy Rahimi’s efforts to penetrate the world of men obfuscating
   Hanaei’s crimes.

   “We need to finish this story,” Ebrahimi said, her pale eyes burning,
   during the 75-minute interview in Paris. “This Islamic Republic has to
   end. Women today know their rights. They know what life and freedom of
   expression are. It will take time and blood, but there is no other
   way.”

   It took time and flexibility to make “Holy Spider,” which is directed
   by Ali Abbasi, an Iranian exile based in Copenhagen. Filming was
   impossible in Iran, given the government’s hostility to the project,
   and months of preparation in Turkey came to nothing when the Turkish
   authorities, apparently under pressure from Tehran, blocked the
   production. The young Iranian actress who was set to play Rahimi
   withdrew, abruptly overcome by fear of reprisal, just as filming was
   about to start in Jordan, according to Ebrahimi.

   “I got so angry with her,” said Ebrahimi, who was then the casting
   director for the movie. “And I think that night when I got so crazy,
   I’m pretty sure that Ali saw something in me.”

   So, in extremis, Ebrahimi, 41, who found fame in the early 2000s as a
   star of the Iranian TV soap opera “Narges,” took on the lead role.
   Given all of these obstacles, it is, Ebrahimi told me, “a miracle that
   we have it to screen.”

   Image
   In “Holy Spider,” Ebrahimi plays a journalist investigating a serial
   killer.Credit...Utopia
   Image
   The killer, played by Mehdi Bajestani, is based on the true story of
   Saeed Hanaei.Credit...Utopia

   Abbasi, the film’s director, said he wanted to challenge the image of
   “the Islamic Republic and its leaders as some sort of theocratic, dry
   people who are very conservative.” At a deeper level, he suggested,
   “these people are obsessed with sexuality.” Iran is a country, he said,
   where the authorities “get some sort of pleasure out of humiliating
   women.”

   For the director, who visited Mashhad as part of his preparations for
   the movie, “there is a Lynchian undercurrent of fetishized suppressed
   sexuality in every aspect of the Islamic Republic.”

More on the Protests in Iran

Cities across Iran have been embroiled in demonstrations prompted by the
death of a young woman, Mahsa Amini, while she was in police custody.

     * A Women-Led Uprising: Casting off their legally required head
       scarves, Iranian women have been at the forefront of the
       demonstrations, supplying the defining images of defiance.
     * Showing Their Support: From World Cup soccer players to movie
       personalities, high-profile Iranians are increasingly making public
       gestures of support for the protests.
     * The Crackdown: Witness accounts and a Times video analysis reveal
       how Iran’s security forces are co-opting ambulances to infiltrate
       demonstrations and detain protesters.
     * Fire and Fury: Protesters set fire to the childhood home of the
       Islamic revolution’s founder, Ayatollah Khomeini, after a wave of
       anger erupted over the government’s killing of children.

   His words brought to mind a meeting I had in the holy Iranian city of
   Qum in 2009. A mullah sat on a raised dais as he explained in measured
   terms the rationale of the Islamic Republic. Then the subject turned to
   women. How could any man not lose control, he suddenly frothed, if
   women’s hair and the curves of their bodies were allowed to be seen in
   public? This was the gateway to hell, he shouted.

   Ebrahimi’s life as an actor in Iran had fallen apart a few years before
   that meeting, when a video of lovemaking she said she had made with her
   boyfriend at the time was leaked by a friend, another actor, who
   somehow stole it when at their apartment. It became known as the “sex
   tape case,” and the hounding of Ebrahimi knew no bounds.

   “All these people were watching my naked body and just kept copying the
   video and selling it in the street,” she said. “And I had to lie every
   day and just say it was not me, and I can’t tell you how painful it all
   was. Not because I was ashamed of what I did, but because of the
   betrayal from my colleagues and this whole society.”

   The government set about finding every man with whom she had shaken
   hands, or been photographed, she said; every man she had ever kissed on
   the cheek. It was clear her career in Iran was over. She was about to
   confront her various accusers in court, facing a prison sentence and 97
   lashes on the charge of having sexual relationships outside wedlock,
   when she decided to flee.

   Ebrahimi flew to Azerbaijan, she said, and later from there to Paris,
   where she has since built a life. She has not returned to Iran, where
   most of her family still lives, and became a French citizen in 2017.

   Image
   After fleeing Iran, Ebrahimi settled in Paris. She said she had not
   returned.Credit...Elliott Verdier for The New York Times

   In recent weeks, as antigovernment protests have spread across Iran and
   more than 200 people have been killed, Ebrahimi has been transfixed.
   Watching a new generation resisting arrest and shouting, “I don’t want
   this hijab, what’s your problem with my hair?” has given her hope.

   “I saw these images of three actresses throwing away their hijabs,
   saying we don’t want to lie anymore, we don’t want to hide ourselves,”
   Ebrahimi said, “and I figure if they arrived at this point, the whole
   of society is kind of there.”

   At the same time, she says she knows that the guardians of the Islamic
   Republic will resist to the end. “The last foundation they have for the
   regime is women and imposing the hijab,” Ebrahimi said. “They believe
   if the hijab comes off, everything will be destroyed — the Islamic
   Republic will tumble down.”

   Ebrahimi said she felt a lot of emotion that her film was arriving in
   American theaters at the same time as the protests; it feels like “all
   these things are happening in the same direction,” she said.

   “We can’t be controlled by them anymore,” Ebrahimi said. “We can’t hide
   ourselves and play this game. We grew up learning how to lie. There are
   84 million people in Iran, and they are 84 million actors. Lying,
   existing inside and outside. Lying inside to our parents that we didn’t
   meet someone outside, lying outside that we don’t party inside.”

   In making the film, Ebrahimi drew on these experiences of being
   humiliated by an oppressive government. Her trauma became a source of
   inspiration and resolve.

   Rahimi, determined to find the murderer who keeps dumping strangled
   women on the outskirts of town, and driven by the memory of how an
   overbearing male editor had abused her, encounters forms of male
   contempt and evasion.

   She meets a mullah who assures her that every effort is being made to
   solve the crimes, even as he hints that it may be God’s will that these
   female sinners be eliminated. She encounters various men who form a
   protective shield around the killer, admired in his community as a
   husband, father and war veteran. She confronts a police officer who
   comes to her hotel room and tries to seduce her, dangling the
   possibility of information for sex.

   “We worked on that scene with the policeman for two hours, and I saw
   that I could link my personal experience of life to this journalist,”
   Ebrahimi said. “She was living inside me, and you know, improvisation
   is an important part of Ali’s work. I came up with the idea of the
   memory of harassment by a colleague and editor as the motivating force
   for the journalist.”

   Image
   The film is about female defiance in the face of male violence. “Women
   today know their rights,” Ebrahimi said about Iran, where protests have
   erupted recently. “They know what life and freedom of expression
   are.”Credit...Elliott Verdier for The New York Times

   Ebrahimi, who received threats from the Islamic Republic soon after she
   won the award at Cannes, including an allusion by the culture ministry
   to the fate of the author Salman Rushdie, said that the impact of
   living in Iran “affects men, too. If they drink or not, if they read
   something or not — there is this continuous pressure to deceive.”

   Hanaei’s crimes were called the “spider killings” by local news media
   because of how he carried them out. He confessed to killing 16 women,
   and was executed in 2002. In “Holy Spider,” the character is played
   with psychological intricacy by Mehdi Bajestani. He is desperate to
   believe that he is doing God’s will, and that of the Islamic Republic,
   by killing prostitutes. The pressure on him grows. He snaps at his
   wife. He feels suspicion growing.

   “I think he’s kind of a victim of the whole society, of the whole
   mind-set,” Ebrahimi said.

   At one point, his wife surprises him at home after a murder. He
   hurriedly wraps the corpse in a carpet. His wife finds him tense and
   impenetrable; she coaxes him to have sex. On top of his wife, sweating,
   thrusting, he sees the foot of the strangled prostitute sticking out
   from the carpet.

   “He has something of what I call Travis Bickle syndrome,” Abbasi said,
   a reference to the hero of “Taxi Driver.” “Back from a war, in an
   existential black hole, missing the violence. And in that scene, sexual
   pleasure and violence juxtapose each other.”

   “It’s a movie about a serial killer,” Ebrahimi said, “but also about a
   serial-killer society. I know, because at some point, I got killed
   actually by each person in that society, except perhaps 10 percent who
   still had my back.”

   She continued: “I sometimes think, for an actress, I’m happy to have
   this much pain in my life, to have experienced this sex tape story. I
   put everything into the movie, all my life.”

   When at last Rahimi finds the killer by impersonating a prostitute, he
   asks her name.

   “Zahra,” she says, falsely.

   “This was pure improvisation,” Ebrahimi said. “It was not in the
   script. I said ‘Zahra,’ which is my real name, even if I don’t use it
   anymore.”

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

Site Information Navigation

     * © 2022 The New York Times Company

     * NYTCo
     * Contact Us
     * Accessibility
     * Work with us
     * Advertise
     * T Brand Studio
     * Your Ad Choices
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Service
     * Terms of Sale
     * Site Map
     * Canada
     * International
     * Help
     * Subscriptions

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-P528B3&gtm_auth=tfAzqo1
   rYDLgYhmTnSjPqw&gtm_preview=env-130&gtm_cookies_win=x
