   Reports

Faces of Exile

Share this:
--

   Since 2001, CPJ has documented the cases of 340 journalists forced into
   exile after their reporting exposed them to harassment, violence, or
   imprisonment. They face many difficulties in their new homes, from
   language and cultural adjustments to emotional and economic hardships.
   Here are five snapshots of journalists in exile.

   DINA YAFASOVA
--
   New home: Denmark

   Date of exile: 2001

   Reason for leaving: Yafasova fled after she was threatened with
--
   audiotape.

   Life in exile: Yafasova won asylum in Denmark in 2002 and was joined by
   her family. She has continued writing but has suffered the effects of
   her persecution in Uzbekistan. Eventually, she spent 11 months at the
--
   refugee camp in 2001.

   On the freedom of exile: “Exile freed me from shackles. In exile, I
   could achieve a much greater degree of human freedom, which never could
   be achieved under dictatorship in my homeland. And this feeling of
--
   New home: Canada

   Date of exile: 2004

   Reason for leaving: Samad was under constant surveillance by military
--
   “greet” him at the airport if he returned from a conference in Canada.

   Life in exile: Samad opted to remain outside the country and to seek
   asylum, which he won in January 2005. His family joined him in Canada
   in 2006, and he has held various non-journalism jobs since—as a
   security guard, a concierge, and a salesman. Once a prominent voice in
   Bangladesh, he was met with closed doors when he tried to continue
   working for Bangladeshi papers while in exile. He now contributes
   pieces to expatriate news Web sites and runs the pro-democracy blog
   Bangladesh Watchdog.

   On the professional cost of exile: “After I lost my steady job with the
   Bangladesh Observer, the international press stopped requesting
   contributions of articles about the region.”
--
   New home: Kenya

   Date of exile: 2007

   Reason for leaving: Tesfaye fled from the harassment and threats that
--
   constitution,” he would be killed.

   Life in exile: Tesfaye has spent the past year in Nairobi, awaiting
   refugee resettlement through the United Nations High Commissioner for
   Refugees. In November 2007, Tesfaye and two fellow exiled journalists
   were assaulted in their apartment by men they believe were Ethiopian
   government agents. Tesfaye and his exiled colleagues keep a low
   profile. Unable to find work, they rely on small contributions from
   international organizations and family members in the diaspora.

   On the hardest part of life in exile: “Survival. There is no work here
   in Nairobi. You ask: Where will I get money? You are worried so much.
   Then you are forced to ask somebody, forced to be a beggar.”
--
   New home: Spain

   Date of exile: 2008

   Reason for leaving: González Raga boarded a flight to Spain immediately
--
   Castillo, followed negotiations between the Spanish and Cuban
   governments. Prior to those talks, CPJ provided the Spanish government
   with information supporting the reporters’ release. Life in exile:
   González Raga is now publishing his prison writings, and he makes
   occasional contributions to Spanish media outlets. He struggles to
--
   New home: United States

   Date of exile: 2008

   Reason for leaving: Sigarchi escaped to the United States while on
--
   government-funded Radio Farda.

   Life in exile: Sigarchi lives outside Washington and has applied for
   political asylum. Unable to get employment while his work permit is
   being processed, and in need of assistance to cover living and medical
--
   teach.

   On the decision to go into exile: “Maybe you expect I’d complain about
   exile, but I’m satisfied here because this is my choice. I had two
   options: one, to stay in Iran and be in prison under torture, and two,
   to be in exile.”

   To help journalists in exile, go to Journalist Assistance.

   Karen Phillips is CPJ’s journalist assistance associate.
--
          Blogger
          Dangerous Assignments
          Exiled
          Journalist Assistance

