Asia

Afghan journalist in exile: “If I stop writing, I stop existing”

   After the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan in 2021, many journalists had
   to leave the country. DW Akademie offers scholarships, training and
   mentorships to support journalists in exile. We spoke to one of them*.

   Afghanistan Kandahar 2020 | Mann mit Smartphone
--
   Freedom. With this project, DW Akademie and local partner organizations
   are helping to create new perspectives for journalists and media in
   exile. Previously, the participant worked as a freelance journalist,
   columnist and analyst for the three biggest newspapers in Afghanistan,
   covering current issues and political developments in the country. The
--
   stay. Without freedom of speech, we couldn’t work anymore.

   I continue to work in exile, but I have to keep a low profile. Now I am
   part of a project that helps to keep me busy and not forget my passion
   and professionalism.
--
   else.

   What are the greatest challenges for you as a journalist in exile?

   The biggest problem is our uncertain future: Now we are in Pakistan,
--
   weight during these last eight months.

   In exile there are daily struggles. You have to find a way to cover
   your expenses, to keep a positive mindset. Every day I wonder what will
   happen tomorrow, what do I do if there is no safe shelter? There is
--
   experience and it is worth nothing anymore now.

   What are the topics you are covering in exile?

   I have started working on two projects. The first was an interview with
   a journalist who is the founder and editor-in-chief of a news agency
   working in exile. I spoke to him about the challenges and obstacles,
   how difficult it is to find funding, etc.

--
   communication.

   So, I am focusing on training at the moment. When you are in exile, you
   are not in a good psychological place. Writing is somehow difficult,
   but I still try. If I stop writing, I stop existing.
--
   finish my degree. I’m also trying to find international media houses to
   work with, to keep myself busy but also to find a way to cover my
   expenses. It’s hard to be in exile without any funding.

   The main thing that helps about the training is that we also learn to
--
   Commissioner for Culture and Media are supporting journalists, media
   workers and defenders of freedom of expression in crisis and conflict
   areas, as well as those living in exile.
     * Date 15.11.2022
     * Author Nina Molter
