   Attacks On The Press

In African hot spots, journalists forced into exile

   By Mick Stern on February 16, 2010 12:57 AM EST
--
   leaving a deep void in professional reporting. The starkest examples
   are in the Horn of Africa nations of Somalia, Ethiopia, and Eritrea,
   where dozens of journalists have been forced into exile. Zimbabwe,
   Rwanda, and the Gambia have also lost large segments of the local press
   corps in the face of intimidation and violence.
--
Regional Analysis:
• In African hot spots,
journalists forced into exile
Country Summaries
• DRC
--
   professional journalists has enabled governments or political factions
   to exert editorial control over once-independent news outlets. “The
   high exile rates of journalists have not brought a lack of information
   so much as misinformation,” said Abdiaziz Hassan, a local correspondent
   for Reuters in Somalia. “It incites the conflict further.”
--
   base of operations for the militant insurgent group Al-Shabaab—the
   station has seen five of its journalists killed, numerous staffers
   threatened, and several forced into exile. Without sufficient
   management on site, the station has been susceptible to pressure from
   Al-Shabaab to censor its coverage and even broadcast the group’s
   propaganda, according to Mohamed Amin, a former Shabelle deputy
   director now in exile.

   In all, CPJ has documented the cases of 30 Somali journalists who have
   gone into exile this decade, the fourth-highest tally worldwide during
   the period. CPJ’s data on exiled journalists include only those
   journalists who fled due to work-related persecution, who remained in
   exile for at least three months, and whose whereabouts and activities
   are known. Local organizations using different criteria report higher
   numbers. The Union of Exiled Somali Journalists, for example, counts as
   many as 80 exiled reporters. Most of these exiles have fled in the face
   of astonishing violence: Twenty-one Somali journalists have been killed
   in direct connection to their work since 2005, some at the hands of
--
   Al-Shabaab.

   Here’s another common thread: Most of the exiled Somali journalists
   speak English. That’s no coincidence, noted former Shabelle reporter
   Ahmednor Mohamed, who said insurgents have targeted English-speaking
--

   “There’s little question that the decimation of Somali journalists—by
   assassination or through exile—has reduced the quantity and quality of
   news coming out of that country,” Salopek said. “They were the first
   responders, if you will, to breaking news in Somalia. And most of them
--
   decade have been followed by years of steady repression. The threat of
   jail has led at least 41 Ethiopian journalists and 24 Eritreans into
   exile, CPJ data show, although local groups suggest the figures may be
   much higher.

--
   again ready to imprison critical reporters and editors. “Everything
   became illegal,” said Wondrad Debretsion, an Ethiopian editor who
   recently went into exile. “Even state-sponsored reporters have started
   fleeing the country.” The continuing exodus has weakened the
   independence of the remaining Ethiopian press. The Awramba Times, a
--
   rounded up 18 critical editors and reporters, jailed them without
   trial, and held them in secret locations. The crackdown pushed other
   independent reporters into exile, and effectively shuttered the
   independent press. The government’s heavy-handed repression has also
   forced out state-employed journalists, one of whom, Paulos Kidane, died
--


   Many exiled African journalists face great challenges and continuing
   risk. The Union of Exiled Somali Journalists said about half of its
   members eke out a precarious existence on the dangerous streets of
   Kenya’s capital, Nairobi. Most fled so precipitously that they took few
   belongings or identification papers. The exile union, along with the
   National Union of Somali Journalists, both said they had received
   reports that Somali exiles have faced arbitrary harassment and
   detention at the hands of Kenyan police.

   The Rwandan Mukombozi told CPJ that members of his family had been
   assaulted twice in Kigali after he was forced into exile. “All that
   psychological pressure more than triples when such incidents happen,”
   he said by e-mail, “and the restricted communication between the exiled
   journalist and his/her family makes the harm on both sides enormous.”

--
   but they are rarely at ease because of the suspected presence of
   Gambian security agents, said Demba Jawo, former head of the Gambian
   Press Union. “Sometimes exiled Gambian journalists feel compelled to
   move periodically to avoid detection from these security agents,” he
   said.

   Even those in safe circumstances face enormous professional challenges.
   At least 48 Zimbabwean journalists have been forced into exile since
   2000, most of them in the early half of the decade during sustained
   harassment by President Robert Mugabe’s government, according to CPJ
--

   Yet some who revived their careers also created a vibrant diaspora news
   media. Gerry Jackson, an exiled Zimbabwean journalist, launched the
   London-based SW Radio in 2001. The station broadcasts programming into
   Zimbabwe in English and in the Shona and Ndebele languages. Wilf
   Mbanga, another exile, started The Zimbabwean newspaper in 2005. Based
   in his new home in England, Mbanga produces a weekly that circulates in
   the United Kingdom, South Africa—and Zimbabwe. Abel Mutasakani, who
--
   the Web publication ZimOnline.

   Ethiopian and Eritrean exiles have similarly launched Web sites,
   typically focusing on events back home. While limited in what they can
   report firsthand, these sites receive and report leaked documents,
--
   commentary.

   The irony that exiled journalists are getting independent news and
   views into their native countries is not lost on people such as the
   Zimbabwean Geoff Hill. “Since nationalizing the press in 1981, Mugabe
   has done his best to control the flow of information, but now there are
   so many leaks in the bucket, it is more like a watering can,” said
   Hill, himself an exiled journalist who still reports on the country.
   “Much of the credit for this must go to the hard breed of Zimbabwean
   journalists—both at home and in exile—who refuse to surrender.”


