   #Ali Nada Mustafa. — Gender, Race and Sudan’s Exile Politics: Do We All
   Belong to this Country? Cahiers d’études africaines, Numéros Cahiers
   d’études africaines, Documents
--
   Analyses et comptes rendus

Ali Nada Mustafa. — Gender, Race and Sudan’s Exile Politics: Do We All Belong
to this Country?

--
   Référence(s) :

   Ali Nada Mustafa. — Gender, Race and Sudan’s Exile Politics: Do We All
   Belong to this Country? London, Lexington Books, 2015, 215 p., index.
   Texte | Citation | Auteur
--

   1“Do we all belong to this country?” asks Nada Mustafa Ali in her book
   entitled: Gender, Race and Sudan’s Exile Politics. The title of the
   book is taken from a speech given in 1998 in Cairo by anthropologist
   Sharif Harir, the vice president of the Sudan Federal Democratic Party
--
   and politics in Sudan starting from the 1950s till the separation in
   2011. Using gender and intersectional perspectives, Ali examines the
   discourses and practices of the Sudanese opposition in exile. The
   author carefully analyses the interplay between gender and race, and to
   a lesser extent social class and religion, as tenants shaping Sudanese
--
   delves into the contemporary dynamics of women’s participation,
   discussions around women’s human rights, nationalism and gender
   equality in Sudan and in exile. She examines these questions looking
   closely at the opposition movements organised under the umbrella of the
   National Democratic Alliance (NDA) in exile in the 1990s and early
   2000s. She skillfully places these debates in a wider historical
   perspective of Sudanese politics which are developed in chapter 3,
--
   3One of the main contributions of the book is its longitudinal
   research, and Nada Ali’s personal involvement in the opposition
   movement and exile politics since mid-1990s and her particular
   commitment to feminist coalition building among different Sudanese
   women’s groups. In the introductory chapter, she discusses her
--
   movements in nation building. It provides rich interview material and
   in-depth analysis of documents and speeches, as well as author’s
   encounters with the different women’s groups and activists in exile.
   Ali provides detailed feminist and intersectional analysis of Sudanese
   women’s activisms throughout the 20^th century, with a careful
   examination of the activities of exiled Sudanese and South Sudanese
   women in the 1990s and 2000s. Chapter 4 examines in depth the gendered
   discourses and, and to a lesser extent, practices of the Sudanese
   opposition in exile. Chapter 5, on the other hand, focuses its analysis
   on the ways gender and race were intertwined in the emancipatory
   project of New Sudan. Ali shows also how this vision turned later into
--
Référence papier

   Katarzyna Grabska, « Ali Nada Mustafa. — Gender, Race and Sudan’s Exile
   Politics: Do We All Belong to this Country? », Cahiers d’études
   africaines, 240 | 2020, 1015-1017.
--
Référence électronique

   Katarzyna Grabska, « Ali Nada Mustafa. — Gender, Race and Sudan’s Exile
   Politics: Do We All Belong to this Country? », Cahiers d’études
   africaines [En ligne], 240 | 2020, mis en ligne le 02 décembre 2020,
