   #Committee to Protect Journalists » Feed Committee to Protect
   Journalists » Comments Feed Committee to Protect Journalists » Silence
   in Burundi as violence forces independent press into exile Comments
   Feed alternate alternate alternate

--

   A Bujumbura road is blocked during unrest over elections in Burundi in
   July. Many Burundians, including journalists, have gone into exile to
   flee the violence. (Reuters/Mike Hutchings) A Bujumbura road is blocked
   during unrest over elections in Burundi in July. Many Burundians,
   including journalists, have gone into exile to flee the violence.
   (Reuters/Mike Hutchings)
   Features & Analysis

Silence in Burundi as violence forces independent press into exile

   By Kerry Paterson and Tom Rhodes/CPJ Africa Program on August 26, 2015
--
   protests.

   An exiled journalist who used to work for Renaissance Radio and
   Television told CPJ the station had come under pressure from the
   government during protests in April to report favorably or be closed
--
   even any social media accounts you have–as if they had any legal
   authority to do so.” The journalist, who hid in a truck carrying sacks
   of tea and whose two children managed to join him in exile, added:
   “Police just sit idly by and let these armed youth do as they please,
   the situation was so precarious, you never know what might happen.”
--
   senseless situation to our children, I am often lost for words.”

   Life in exile is far from easy. Compared to Burundi, Rwanda can be
   expensive, and many journalists fled with few possessions or prospects
   for work. The majority have their families with them, a journalist
--
   fears, told CPJ. Relatives who stayed behind have been forced into
   hiding for fear of retributive violence. Former senior journalists in
   exile have found themselves sharing cramped rooms, surviving on one
   meal per day, said Bonesha FM Director Patrick Nduwimana. The support
   organization Rwanda Journalists Association has helped some of those in
   exile by providing a guesthouse and space for the journalists to work,
   the association’s executive secretary, Gonzaga Muganwa, said.

--
   will be “stuck relying on rumors rather than impartial information,”
   Nduwimana, of Bonesha FM, said. He is involved in a project with some
   of the journalists living in exile, who launched an online radio
   station named Nzamba, which refers to a traditional trumpet. It
   broadcasts a daily news program focused on Burundi.
--
          Burundian Press Observatory
          Diane Nininahazwe
          Exiled
          Gonzaga Muganwa
          Innocent Muhozi
