   Reports

Forced to flee: A timeline of journalists’ flight into exile

Share this:
--
   to Protect Journalists has supported 42 journalists around the world
   who were forced to flee, with Syria, Ethiopia, and Eritrea responsible
   for the most cases of exile. These are some of their stories.

Timeline
--
• Uncertain Future
Data
• Exiled in past year
• Exiled since 2009
• Methodology
More on this issue
--
• Journalist Assistance

   Most of the journalists CPJ has assisted in exile had little or no
   warning that they would be forced to flee, to undertake a journey of
   trauma and uncertainty. While their experiences have much in common
--
   Furthermore, the media community left behind is often intimidated into
   self-censorship and the public deprived of information. CPJ is
   releasing its annual survey of journalists in exile to mark World
   Refugee Day, June 20.

   While each journalist in exile has a unique tale to tell, every
   reporter, broadcaster, photojournalist, videographer, editor, blogger,
   and media worker forced to flee experiences similar dangers and must
   overcome similar milestones to reach any new semblance of normal life.
   This timeline looks in detail at the journeys into exile of eight
   journalists from around the world who fled their homes in recent years
   and sought support from CPJ. All of their comments are from interviews
--
The Journalism

   Some exiled journalists become targets after publishing or broadcasting
   one sensitive story. CPJ research shows that such stories are usually
   on politics, corruption, crime, war, or violence.
--
   assisted over the past five years cited fear of violence as their
   reason for leaving. In fact, Somalia, Syria, and Sri Lanka, which
   account for a quarter of CPJ’s exiled assistance cases, are all ranked
   among the top five countries on CPJ’s Impunity Index, which spotlights
   countries where journalists are murdered regularly and their killers go
--
   The other most common reason cited by journalists for fleeing is fear
   of imprisonment. Two countries who consistently jail journalists for
   their work, Iran and Ethiopia, are responsible for sending into exile
   about a quarter of the journalists CPJ has assisted over the past five
   years.
--
   successfully registered as a refugee, the date they receive for their
   resettlement interview is often one or two years in the future. And it
   is nearly impossible for exiled journalists to receive updates on the
   status of their case.

--
   The journalist believed his name would be recognized; he was terrified
   of being stopped and sent back to prison. Even in Khartoum, Sudan’s
   capital, he felt unsafe surrounded by so many exiled Eritreans. “I did
   not know who to trust,” he said. He traveled by car and on foot to
   South Sudan, passing several checkpoints and bribing officers to let
--
   As they wait among the community of refugees from their own country,
   journalists are extremely vulnerable because their work has made them
   recognizable. In many cases, journalists in exile continue to be
   targeted by their home governments, whose agents infiltrate refugee
   communities abroad. In some cases, home governments target the
--
   months after the attack on the city’s Westgate Mall that killed 67
   people, Kenya’s Ministry of Interior ordered all refugees to be
   relocated to refugee camps, a dangerous location for exiled
   journalists, CPJ research shows. “[Refugee] camps are not safe because
   there is no security, no police,” Abdifatah said. “Everyone knows who
--
   Al-Shabaab, believed to be responsible for the murders of many Somali
   journalists at home, has penetrated the camps. Ethiopian journalists
   exiled to Kenya are also targeted by the directive; they fear the
   presence of Ethiopian security agents in the camps.

--
   of his colleagues informed the secret service in Iran of his
   activities. Even though he is out of the country, he still feels
   vulnerable-a common sentiment among Iranian journalists in exile,
   according to CPJ research.

--
   said.

   Exiled journalists who go straight to the country where they apply for
   asylum also go through a difficult waiting period. Some journalists try
   to continue working while finding their footing in a new country, only
--
   filed an asylum claim for his family at the French embassy in Jordan.

   Journalists who flee into exile sometimes arrive with no support
   network to cushion the fall of landing suddenly in a foreign country.

--
   with their life,” Ombara said.

   One of the worst factors of exile for journalists is the difficulty of
   continuing their career. Even once they have documentation allowing
   employment, language is a barrier for many. About 20% of journalists
   assisted by CPJ have continued to work in journalism after going into
   exile.

   Rodríguez Saludes Rodríguez Saludes
--
An Uncertain Future

   Exile is an enduring condition. In most cases, journalists who flee
   their countries do not have a clear vision of the future until many
   years later. Though none will ever be at home, some journalists are
--
   country.

   METHODOLOGY: CPJ’s annual exile report counts only cases who have been
   supported by the organization’s Journalist Assistance Program. CPJ uses
   this research, combined with expert analysis, to identify global
   trends. The survey includes only journalists who fled due to
   work-related persecution, who remained in exile for at least three
   months, and whose current whereabouts and activities are known to CPJ.
   The survey does not include the many journalists and media workers who
