   #Committee to Protect Journalists » Feed Committee to Protect
   Journalists » Comments Feed Committee to Protect Journalists » For
   Turkish journalists in Berlin exile, threats remain, but in different
   forms Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate

--
   Can Dündar, the former editor-in-chief of Cumhuriyet newspaper pictured
   on April 7, 2017, now runs nonprofit online radio station 'Ozguruz'
   from exile in Germany. (AP/Markus Schreiber) Can Dündar, the former
   editor-in-chief of Cumhuriyet newspaper pictured on April 7, 2017, now
   runs nonprofit online radio station 'Ozguruz' from exile in Germany.
   (AP/Markus Schreiber)
   Features & Analysis

For Turkish journalists in Berlin exile, threats remain, but in different
forms

--
   main actor on stage playing a journalist as he was imprisoned in
   Turkey, had his house searched, his books banned, and then had to leave
   the country and start a new life in exile in Berlin, leaving behind his
   wife, whose passport was confiscated by the authorities. The journalist
   on the stage was Dündar himself, and the dramatic events unfolding were
--
   officer and sharing an emotional moment was unimaginable in Turkey,
   where police are a constant source of fear. It demonstrated how much
   life in exile is different from the one left behind in Turkey, but at
   the same time highlighted the persistence of threats. I spoke with
   Dündar and two other Turkish journalists living in Berlin about their
   work and life in exile and the dangers they face in their new
   environment.

--
   authorities because of her reporting. “I only have to meet authorities
   when I do my paperwork concerning my stay here,” she said.
   Hayko Bağdat, a Turkish journalist in exile in Berlin, moves around
   with so many police officers that 'people might think I am Brad Pitt.'
   (Hayko Bağdat) Hayko Bağdat, a Turkish journalist in exile in Berlin,
   moves around with so many police officers that ‘people might think I am
   Brad Pitt.’ (Hayko Bağdat)
--
   Dündar, the former editor-in-chief of Cumhuriyet newspaper and a
   recipient of CPJ’s 2016 International Press Freedom Award, is one of
   the most prominent Turkish journalists in exile. He had to leave his
   country in June 2016 after he was continuously harassed by authorities
   and sentenced to prison on charges of revealing state secrets for a
--
   moving to London where the Turkish community is more diverse and he
   might be less exposed to such harassment.
   Turkish reporter and producer Zübeyde Sari lives in exile in Berlin,
   where she sometimes feels hostility from the local Turkish community.
   (Çağrı Akkemik) Turkish reporter and producer Zübeyde Sari lives in
   exile in Berlin, where she sometimes feels hostility from the local
   Turkish community. (Çağrı Akkemik)

--
   More On:
          Can Dündar
          Exiled
          Hayko Bağdat
          Ozgurguz
